ANALYSIS
(a)        General Principles

          It is the undoubted duty of this Court to review the fitness of any sentence imposed. That it must do so bearing in mind the privileged position occupied by the trial judge is settled law. All agree that the sentencing process is hardly an exact science. It is a subjective process which features a large measure of discretion. The intrinsically discretionary nature of the sentence decision explains, at least in part, the Supreme Court's insistence on a deferential approach to all sentence reviews. See R. v. Shropshire, 1995 CanLII 47 (SCC), [1995] 4 S.C.R. 227, R. v. M. (C.A.), 1996 CanLII 230 (SCC), [1996] 1 S.C.R. 500, and R. v. MacDonnell, 1997 CanLII 369 (SCC), [1997] 1 S.C.R. 305.

[Page 5]

          Nevertheless, deference has its limits, and this Court is duty bound to vary a sentence in appropriate circumstances. Indeed, if the sentencing court commits an error of law or an error in principle, or if the sentence imposed is clearly unreasonable, there is no longer room for deference and this Court is required to impose the sentence which it considers fit. See R. v. F.S.A. (1996), 1996 CanLII 10270 (NB CA), 182 N.B.R. (2d) 20 (C.A.), and R. v. Melanson (E.R.) (1998), 1998 CanLII 12185 (NB CA), 199 N.B.R. (2d) 338 (C.A.).

          In this context, an error in law most commonly occurs as a result of a misapprehension of the evidence or a misapplication of judicial precedents. As for an error in principle, it typically involves one or more of the following: the application of wrong sentencing principles, a failure to consider relevant factors or the taking into account of irrelevant considerations. As well, there will be cases where the failure to give proper weight to each relevant circumstance will amount to an error in principle. (Our Court will necessarily be slow to find an error of this nature for, if it was otherwise, professions of deference would soon ring hollow.) Finally, a sentence will be clearly unreasonable where it is either inordinately long or inordinately short. It will reach this level only if it is a substantial and marked departure from the sentence customarily imposed for similarly situated offenders committing similar crimes.

(b)      The mitigating circumstances

          The sentencing judge considered that the absence of criminal convictions during the period from 1993 to July 1, 1997, Mr. Johnston's remorse and his acceptance of responsibility for his crime constituted mitigating circumstances. As well, she found Mr. Johnston's personal tragedy as a victim of sexual abuse to be moving. Whatever label she attached to these factors,

[Page 6]

there is no denying that each figured prominently in her reasons and influenced the ultimate result.

(i)                 The period without criminal convictions: June 1993 to July 1997

          In considering the absence of convictions between 1993 and 1997 as a mitigating circumstance, the sentencing judge overlooked the evidence which shows that Mr. Johnston was incarcerated from June 1993 until at least March 1995. As a result of this error, she gave Mr. Johnston an undeserved benefit. The most telling feature of Mr. Johnston's most recent past was the following: within two and half years of his release from prison in 1995, he committed this crime against K.C., a crime far more serious than the ones for which he was sentenced in June of 1993 to terms of imprisonment totalling 27 months. The escalation in the seriousness of his criminal behavior, and his failure to avoid criminal convictions for a longer period should have been viewed by the trial judge as aggravating factors.

(ii)               Mr. Johnston's remorse

          With respect, the record of the proceedings does not support the trial judge's conclusion that Mr. Johnston was remorseful. In fact, he did not express, at least on the record, any regret for his wrongdoing.

(iii)            Responsibility for the crime

          While Mr. Johnston's plea of not guilty could not, under any circumstances, be considered an aggravating factor, the conclusion by the trial judge that Mr. Johnston had accepted

[Page 7]

responsibility for his crime does not accord with the evidence. Rather, the opposite conclusion is warranted in light of Mr. Johnston's argument in the court below that his status as a victim entitled him to leniency and that others should assume at least some of the blame for his crime. It cannot be said that Mr. Johnston willingly and voluntarily assumed responsibility for his misdeed. The reality is that the responsibility for the crime had to be imposed by the jury after the victim was compelled to go through the embarrassing ordeal of publicly describing the degradation she endured at the hands of Mr. Johnston.

(iv)      Mr. Johnston's personal tragedy

          The trial judge found Mr. Johnston's representation to be moving. There is no doubt that she was significantly influenced by Mr. Johnston's history of prior sexual abuse and betrayal at the hands of government employees entrusted with his well-being. However, there is no proof that the sexual abuse Mr. Johnston endured as a youth forced him, as a mature adult, to sexually assault K.C. and to cause her bodily harm. The nature of his crime, and the long time span between the two events are such, that Mr. Johnston's personal tragedy as a teenager could not be viewed as a mitigating factor. See R. v. Ivan (G.J.) (1995), 1995 CanLII 6560 (NB CA), 160 N.B.R. (2d) 248 (C.A.).

          In point of fact, K.C. did not cause any harm to Mr. Johnston. Her brutalization occurred more than 20 years after Mr. Johnston was himself abused. By July 1, 1997, Mr. Johnston was 38 years old: he was mature enough to know full well that K.C. bore no blame whatsoever for the abuse he had suffered as a youth.

[Page 8]

          Unfortunately, the trial judge allowed Mr. Johnston's history of abuse to overtake the sentencing process and, as a result, she lost sight of the fact that K.C. was the sole victim of the crime perpetrated on July 1, 1997, a crime for which only Mr. Johnston stood to be punished.

          In summary, the sentencing judge erred in law in misapprehending the record before her with respect to Mr. Johnston's criminality during the period from June 1993 to March 1995, and with respect to his remorse and his acceptance of responsibility for the crime against K.C.. As well, she erred in principle in allowing the abuse Mr. Johnston suffered as a youth to influence her ultimate decision.

(b)      The authorities relied on by the sentencing judge

          In her decision, the sentencing judge purported to give effect to this Court's decision in R. v. Chaisson (J.L.) (1996), 1995 CanLII 16079 (NB CA), 168 N.B.R. (2d) 182, and the decision of the Ontario Court of Appeal in R. v. Welch (1996), 1995 CanLII 282 (ON CA), 101 C.C.C. (3d) 216.

          In R. v. Chaisson, supra, this Court dismissed an appeal against sentences of imprisonment totalling 45 months for a number of offences committed in circumstances which bear some resemblance to the circumstances of this case. However, there are important distinguishing features which, unfortunately, were overlooked by the sentencing judge. First, while Mr. Chaisson engaged in sexual misconduct in committing the crimes for which he was convicted, he was not charged with sexual assault, let alone the offence of causing bodily harm in the course of a sexual assault. Second, the sentences in the Chaisson case, which the Court described as towards the lower end of any range, were undoubtedly motivated to a large extent by the fact that the accused had pled guilty.

[Page 9]

          In most cases, a plea of guilty is a powerful mitigating factor. The reasons for this are well-known. First, such a plea quite properly reduces the punishment which otherwise would be meted out because it saves precious time and scarce resources. Second, it signals a willingness by the accused to embark, sooner rather than later, on the road to rehabilitation. It is commonplace that a plea of guilty will be looked upon with particular favor in sexual assault cases. This is so because it has the additional beneficial consequence of sparing the victim the ordeal of describing to an audience of strangers, at times in excruciating details, how his or her sexual integrity was violated.

          While it is true that in R. v. Welch, supra, the Ontario Court of Appeal upheld a sentence of 34 months imprisonment for a violation of s. 272(1)(c) of the Code, the circumstances there were less damning than the circumstances in the present case. The assault by Mr. Welsh was less violent, cruel and degrading and the harm done to his victim was less severe. Mr. Welch's criminal record was minor and he benefited from a favorable pre-sentence report, as well as a number of character references attesting to his general good character.

          In the present case, the trial judge erred in law in failing to appreciate that the lenient sentence upheld in R. v. Chaisson reflected Mr. Chaisson's guilty plea, and the fact that he was not charged with sexual assault. She also erred in law in failing to appreciate that the circumstances of this case are more serious than the circumstances in the Welch case.