Analysis - Application



Accepting that danger is an essential element of the offence of having care or control of a vehicle, it is still incumbent on this Court to apply the proper analytical framework to determine whether the trial judge erred in acquitting the appellant. My understanding of the law is as follows. In care or control cases, the ultimate task of the trial judge is to decide whether the Crown has met the burden of establishing beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused’s interaction with his or her vehicle presented a danger or, as it is sometimes phrased, a “risk of danger” or a “risk to public safety”. If the facts establish beyond a reasonable doubt a risk of the accused putting the vehicle in motion, either intentionally or unintentionally, or if the facts otherwise support a finding of danger (such as from parking one’s car in the middle of a public thoroughfare), then care or control will have been established. Obviously, this is a general framework. While an intention to drive (to put the vehicle in motion) is not an essential element of the offence, if proven a conviction may follow. In that regard, the Crown has the option of invoking the presumption set out in s. 258(1)(a) of the Criminal Code. If it is established that the accused occupied the driver’s seat, the onus falls on the accused to show that, on a balance of probabilities, it was not for the purpose of setting the vehicle in motion. An accused who fails to rebut the presumption will be deemed to have had care or control of the vehicle and, subject to any other defences, a conviction will follow. Moreover, the failure to rebut the presumption has the legal effect of dispensing with the need to conduct a danger inquiry. If, however, the accused rebuts the presumption, the Crown is still entitled to establish “actual” care or control by proving that there was a risk of putting the vehicle in motion unintentionally or of posing in some other manner an immediate danger to public safety (see Decker and Hannemann). In applying this general framework, the trial judge must have regard to all of the surrounding circumstances leading up to the intervention, typically by the police. Above all else, it is impermissible for the trial judge to isolate certain facts and to deem those facts sufficient for purposes of establishing a risk to public safety. One final point. With respect to the “sleeping it off” cases, the “change-of-mind” and “firm-plan” arguments are sometimes advanced and considered when dealing with the question whether the statutory presumption has been rebutted (e.g., Hannemann). In other cases, the trial judge may deal with those arguments after first ruling that the accused rebutted the presumption of an intention to drive.  Either way, the result should be the same.



Returning to the present case, the Crown elected to invoke the statutory presumption and was able to establish that the appellant had occupied the driver’s seat while his blood-alcohol level exceeded the statutory limit. In turn, the trial judge accepted the appellant’s argument that he had not occupied the driver’s seat for the purpose of setting his vehicle in motion. As that finding has never been challenged at any court level, the Crown is left with two arguments: the circumstances were such that there was a risk of the appellant putting his vehicle in motion unintentionally, or the surrounding circumstances were such that the accused's interaction with the vehicle posed a risk to public safety. Neither argument was advanced at trial and for an obvious reason: there are no facts to support either. As well, the Crown made no attempt to argue that, between the moment the appellant started the truck’s engine and the moment he shut it off, there was a risk of the appellant changing his mind and driving away. Had the argument been advanced, I would have summarily rejected it as being unrealistic or spurious.  However, had the facts established that the appellant turned off the motor and got out of his truck in order to avoid the police, the trial judge may well have come to a different verdict. But, as stated at the outset, courts of appeal must play the hands dealt by the trial judge, unless, of course, palpable and overriding error is shown.