I am puzzled why this wise and experienced trial Judge without
explanation imposed sentences for rape and kidnapping which in
my opinion are harsh and excessive and well beyond those
normally given for even the most vicious cases. I can only surmise
that the Judge must have considered that this man was very
dangerous and should be segregated from society for as long as
possible. I can, however, find no evidence, either on the facts of
the case or in the psychiatric report which permits a sentence so
much above the normal range.
Except where an application has been made for indefinite
detention of a "dangerous offender" under Part XXI of the
Criminal Code, with the special evidence requirements and other
precautions of that Part, I have found few rape cases where such a
principle has been applied in sentencing in modern times. One is
R. v. Hill (1974), 15 C.C.C. (2d) 145 (Ont. C.A.) [affirmed 23
C.C.C. (2d) 321, 58 D.L.R. (3d) 697, 6 N. R. 413], where
concurrent sentences of 12 years for rape and causing bodily harm
were increased to life imprisonment- for the protection of society.
The accused, 26 years old, had assaulted a 14-year-old baby-sitter,
raped her, stripped her and forced her outdoors, then dragged her
back in her house and assaulted her viciously, stabbing her eyes
and face. Two psychiatrists stated he was "dangerous to the
community" and could not forecast when, if ever, he could be
safely returned to the community: see also R. v. Pontello (1977),
38 C.C.C. (2d) 262 (Ont. C.A.).
Hill and Pontello were found inapplicable in R. v. Hatton
(1978), 39 C.C.C. (2d) 281 (Ont. C.A.). Hatton, convicted of two
separate rapes of 17-year-old girls late at night in a city park, and
of an attempted choking of a police decoy girl, had been sentenced
to life imprisonment apparently because of psychiatric evidence
that he was potentially dangerous. The Court of Appeal held that
the sentences should not be more than the "usual range of
sentence for such offences", and substituted eight years for the
first rape, seven years consecutive for the second rape and five
years concurrent on the choking charge.
I do not think it wise or necessary to try to define precisely the
"normal" range of sentence for any offence, and especially for one
so abnormal and varied in its manifestations as rape. Certainly
cases of "stark horror" such as the "brutal, deliberate, vicious
gang rapes" in R. v. Bell, Christiansen, Coden and MacDonald
(1973), 14 C.C.C. (2d) 225, 28 C.R.N.S. 55, 6 N.S.R. (2d) 351
(N.S.C.A.), and R. v. Oliver (1979), 34 N.S.R. (2d) 631
(N.S.C.A.), are far removed from the present case. In Bell
incredibly cruel rapes and indecent assaults by many men on a
16-year-old girl resulted in a 12-year sentence for the leader and
10 years each for three others. In Oliver sentences of 10, nine,
eight and eight years, respectively, were imposed for gang rapes
and repeated horrible assaults on two girls, including the
abandonment of one, 16 years old, overnight in terrible condition
in an unfamiliar isolated area.
At least a sense of what Nova Scotia Courts have considered
appropriate sentences may be obtained from a review of cases
such as the following:
R. v. Crane (1972), 5 N.S.R. (2d) 37 (N.S.C.A.) — sentence of
four years for rape affirmed — no details given of offence,
except three men involved, threats of violence and acts of
indecency.
R. v. Muise (No. 3) (1975), 23 C.C.C. (2d) 440, 11 N.S.R. (2d) 216
(N.S.C.A.) — sentence of three years increased to four years
— rape of 16-year-old hitchhiker, struck with bottle and gross
indecencies.
R. v. Phillips (1975), 13 N.S.R. (2d) 121 (N.S.C.A.) — sentence of
seven years reduced to five years — rape of college girl, with
repeated threats of death — bad previous criminal record.
Amero v. The Queen (1978), 3 C. R. (3d) S-45, 23 N.S.R. (2d) 646
(N.S.C.A.) — sentence of six years reduced to four years —
17-year-old raped woman near residence — threats with
broken bottle — previous record of minor crimes — dicta pp.
S-49-50 C. R. , p. 650 N.S.R.: "A six year sentence for rape is
normally only imposed if there are grave aggravating circum
stances."
R. v. Chaisson (1979), 31 N.S.R. (2d) 115 (N.S.C.A.) — 21-year-
old climbed to apartment of woman and two babies — drank
scotch and after two hours forced the girl at knife point and
raped her — previous convictions for theft and assault — a
planned attack — sentence of two years increased to four
if . .. would appear normally to deserve at least five or six
years' imprisonment" (p. 118) but only four years given
because accused had spent seven months in jail before
sentence and because of the trial Judge's strong feeling that
personal deterrence was not required. While awaiting
sentence accused had received extensive treatment by psychi
atrists who reported "great progress".
R. v. Miller (1979), 32 N.S.R. (2d) 87 — 19-year-old broke into
house of a 65-year-old woman, robbed her, unclothed her and
attempted rape, struck her causing injury, threats of death,
forced her to go with him in her car which he wrecked causing
further injury — woman in hospital six weeks — previous
convictions for manslaughter, assault causing bodily harm and
break, enter and theft — sentences totalling eight years
affirmed on appeal.
Downey v. The Queen (June 18, 1980 — unreported — S.C.C.
00137 — N.S.C.A.) — 28-year-old with lengthy criminal
record including prior conviction for rape and assaults causing
bodily harm — entered apartment, threatened baby and
attacked a young mother who escaped — sentence of seven
years for attempted rape affirmed on appeal.
Since I am respectfully unable to understand or justify on any
basis of principle or precedent the fitness of the total sentences of
17 years imposed by the learned trial Judge, I am required to
determine as best I can what in my view would be fit sentences
for the offences committed: Criminal Code, s. 614(1).
The principal offence was, of course, the rape which with other
assaults occurred during the early evening of the day in question.
Apart from the rape, bodily harm was apparently not caused and
no indecent assaults were committed except the minor one in the
morning many hours before.
For merely the evening events a material penitentiary sentence
would seem appropriate, even if no gun had been involved. We
must also take into account the apparent need for additional
personal deterrence which seems required, bearing in mind this
young man's previous record.
Special account must also be taken of the unlawful detention of
the girl for about 10 hours before the rape occurred. We know
little of what occurred during that time, except the initial stop
near Bedford and two stops for gasoline at Truro. I assume that
they must have also stopped somewhere for food and perhaps
made other stops. The victim was apparently kept under control
by threat of the gun and was thus unable to escape or draw
attention to her plight. We have no evidence or statement from
her. We are left with little information by which to judge the
quality or extremity of her ordeal prior to the rape that evening.
On the credit side we must not forget that the respondent
surrendered himself into custody, fully admitted the offences,
pleaded guilty at his trial and appeared extremely remorseful.
Taking all the circumstances into account, including especially
the ever-present threat of violence from the gun, and, in
deference to the trial Judge, pushing the sentences perhaps to the
high side of the range of appropriateness as judged by comparable
cases, I consider that sentences totalling eight years should be
imposed for the offences here involved, including the consecutive
sentence required by s. 83(1). 
