THE CHIEF JUSTICE—Charged with the offence of theft of an automobile of a value exceeding $50, contrary to s. 280, now s. 294 of the Criminal Code, the appellant was tried and acquitted by His Honour Judge Gratton, District Judge. The Trial Judge held that there was an absence of any evidence to support a finding of intent to commit theft but only evidence of the offence of taking a motor vehicle without consent, contrary to s. 281, now s. 295 Criminal Code, upon which he would have entered a conviction had he been of the opinion that such an offence was included under s. 280 [now s. 294] of the Criminal Code.

Pursuant to s. 584(1) Criminal Code, now s. 605(1), respondent appealed to the Court of Appeal for Ontario against this verdict of acquittal on the ground that the Trial Judge had erred in law in holding that there was no evidence to support a finding of intent to commit theft and a conviction under s. 280 [now s. 294] of the Criminal Code.

The Court of Appeal allowed the appeal, set aside the verdict of acquittal and, as authorized by s. 592(4)(b)(i), now s. 613(4)(b)(i), entered a verdict of guilty with respect to the offence charged and remanded the case to the County Court Judge for sentence. Delivering orally the reasons for the Court at the close of the argument on the appeal, Mr. Justice Aylesworth declared in conclusion:

“...that the charge of theft of the automobile, as laid, was made out and there was evidence, and ample evidence, before the County Court Judge upon

[Page 204]

which the conviction should have been recorded. We think he erred in law in charging himself that there really was no such evidence before him.”

Hence the present appeal to this Court pursuant to s. 597(2)(a)(i), now s. 618(2)(a)(i) Criminal Code.

I had the advantage of reading the reasons for judgment of my brothers Martland, Spence and Laskin. I will defer the consideration of the jurisdictional ground raised by my brother Laskin and precise at first my views with respect to (i) the essence of the distinction between the offence under s. 280 and the offence under s. 281, and (ii) the evidence in the case.

Dealing with point (i):—In R. v. Wilkins[1], the Court of Appeal for Ontario decided that, in essence, the distinction between the two offences lies in the difference that characterizes the intent of the taker which, in the case of theft, is to convert, permanently or temporarily, the property of another in a motor vehicle—or in any other thing—to the use of the taker and which, in the case of the offence under s. 281, is merely to drive a motor vehicle or cause it to be driven. Speaking for the majority of the Court of Appeal, Roach J.A., said this at p. 370 of the report:—

“Ordinarily and were it not for s. 281 the taking of a motor vehicle without the consent of the owner and driving it would carry with it the notion that the taker intended to and in fact did convert it—that is, the property in it—to his own use and in so doing, deprive the owner of the use of it even though such deprivation were only temporary. Where a person in violation of s. 281 takes a motor vehicle without the consent of the owner with the intention merely of driving it, he still deprives the owner of the use of it but Parliament has decreed that there can be a taking and use resulting in deprivation that does not amount to theft and that which distinguishes such a taking is the intent of the taker. If the intent, so said Parlia-

[Page 205]

ment, is merely to drive it then it is not theft but a separate offence. Plainly, however, Parliament did not intend that every such taking would bring the act of the taker without the definition of theft contained in s. 269. Otherwise a person could take a motor vehicle without the consent of the owner and no matter how long or how far he drove it if he could be heard to say that he took it for no other purpose than to drive it, he could escape a charge of theft. That submission would be ridiculous. The taking under s. 281 must be consistent with an intention by the taker that, having driven it, he shall return it or cause it to be returned to the owner and the circumstances under which it was taken the length of time the taker retained possession and the distance he drove it are important indicia in determining whether in taking it the taker intended merely to drive it as contemplated by the section or whether he intended to convert the property in it to his own use. Each case must depend on its own facts.”

With this view of the law, I am in respectful agreement. While the infringement of possession in the case of theft of anything constitutes a crime—or to use the familiar expressions of the common law, a criminal trespass, a felony—generally subject under our Criminal Code to prosecution by way of indictment and punishable by imprisonment for ten years, the infringement of possession of a motor vehicle under s. 281 constitutes an offence which, participating rather of the nature of a civil trespass or misdemeanor, is subject under the Criminal Code to prosecution by way of summary conviction and punishable by either a fine of no more than $500 or to imprisonment for six months, or to both. In both cases, as is generally the case for any other offences, mens rea must necessarily be proved by circumstancial evidence—except, of course, where the accused confesses. The difficulty which may, in a particular case, attend the determination of the specific intent, is foreign to what constitutes the essential and funda-

[Page 206]

mental distinction between the two offences, which distinction, founded as it is on a specific intent, makes these offences mutually exclusive and permits, in the absence of a special provision, no verdict other than a verdict on the offence actually charged.

Dealing with point (ii):—It is appropriate to note that in the consideration of the evidence, this Court, as was the case for the Court of Appeal, is not concerned with the question whether the Trial Judge ought to have inferred guilt of the offence charged—which is a question of fact—but whether he might and could have legally drawn such inference therefrom—which is a question of law.

The evidence is simple. Two witnesses were heard for the prosecution, namely John B. Lanigan, the owner of the automobile, a Pontiac, and Constable Michael Fawcett who, while patrolling highway 17 during the night, encountered and stopped that vehicle then driven by Lafrance. No witness other than the latter was heard for the defence. According to these testimonies, the facts are:—On September 24, 1970, after his day’s work, Lanigan, an Ontario Hydro technician, drove back in his Pontiac to the Voyager Hotel in North Bay where he was lodging. He parked his car in the parking lot of the hotel, leaving the keys in the key hole and some scientific instruments on the rear seat and in the trunk. The next morning, he found out that his automobile had disappeared and reported it as stolen to the police. As to what took place in the interval, during the night, Lafrance, for his part, testified as follows: He and three companions, namely Michael Trudel, Jacques Carrière and Paul Boissonneault, drank wine in his home for about two hours when at about midnight, they decided to drive to Corbeil in order to deliver some stereo tapes which were then in the possession of Carrière. For this

[Page 207]

alleged purpose, they went to one of Trudel’s friends to “get a ride” but with no avail. Trudel told them not to worry, that they would get a ride. They proceeded to the parking lot of the Voyager Hotel where several cars were parked. Trudel saw the keys in Lanigan’s Pontiac and then all, but Boissonneault, boarded that car and left with Trudel at the wheel. They did not go to Corbeil. They drove behind the airport “because there was less traffic and less people”. On their way, Carrière threw out of the car the scientific instruments of Lanigan which were on the rear seat. Eventually, Trudel drove Carrière to his home because the latter was scared. After cruising for some time through the city with Lafranee, Trudel decided to go home. He then left the vehicle to Lafrance and told him to do what he wanted to do with it. Lafrance boarded the car and then proceeded to Sturgeon Falls intending, he said, “—on just going for a ride and then returning it to the Voyager so it would not be noticed that it was stolen”. About half way to Sturgeon Falls, he turned around and was heading back to North Bay when, at 3.40 a.m., he was stopped by Constable Fawcett who had observed that the car was driven in an erratic manner. Asked for his driver’s licence, owner’s permit and insurance certificate, Lafrance said he left them at home. He declared falsely that the scientific instruments in the trunk belonged to his father. He gave a false name, i.e., the name of Lachance, and the address of 132 Norwood in North Bay. Constable Fawcett then locked and secured Lanigan’s car and proceeded with Lafrance to that address to ascertain the truth of the answers he received. Upon arriving at that point, Lafrance entered the house and eventually disappeared. In cross-examination, Lafrance testified: that “he figured that Trudel was stealing the car” when the latter at the parking lot walked to the Pontiac, looked through the window, saw the keys, climbed in and started the motor; that having driven three blocks from the lot, Trudel told them that the car had been stolen and that when Trudel left the car with him, he knew that it was a stolen car.

[Page 208]

I agree with the Court of Appeal not only that the Trial Judge erred in law in holding that there was no evidence from which he might and could have legally inferred the guilt of the accused with respect to the offence of theft but also with the conclusion of the Court of Appeal that there was indeed ample evidence upon which such a conviction could have been recorded.

Dealing with the jurisdictional ground:—Obviously, the Court of Appeal had no jurisdiction to entertain the appeal of the Attorney General unless it raised—as indeed it did—a question of law which, as above indicated, was that the Trial Judge had erred in holding that there was no evidence upon which a verdict of theft could be recorded. The jurisdictional ground raised rests on interpretation given to the reasons of the Trial Judge who, it is said, did not conclude that there was no evidence upon which to convict for theft but that the evidence was not sufficient on the crucial question of intent. The members of the Court of Appeal were unanimously of opinion that the Trial Judge had charged himself that there was an absence of evidence and not an insufficiency of evidence. With this interpretation, I am in agreement. Furthermore, the conclusion of the Trial Judge rests on the invalid premise that in the absence of any evidence from Trudel, he could not find the accused guilty of theft. The evidence of Lafrance, which he accepted, on the crucial point of intent, was quite sufficient.
