(4)         Was the “While Committing” Direction Inadequate?
[92]      The material part of the trial judge’s charge that grounds this basis for appeal is as follows. I have emphasized the portions that have attracted complaint:

In order for Mr. Niemi to be guilty of first degree murder Crown counsel must also prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Niemi murdered Alyssa Watson while he was committing, or attempting to commit, the offence of sexual assault.

This does not mean that the murder and the sexual assault, or attempt to commit sexual assault, have to happen at exactly the same moment. The acts constituting the sexual assault or the attempted sexual assault, may have been committed before the act that caused Ms. Watson’s death, or afterwards. But the murder and the sexual assault, or attempt to commit sexual assault, must be closely connected to one another, in the sense that they must be part of the same series of acts. They must both be part of a single ongoing transaction. A single, ongoing transaction is a sequence of events or course of conduct that is interrelated or linear, ongoing and connected throughout in time.

To answer this question you have to consider the entire course of Mr. Niemi’s conduct. Look at the whole series of events. The evidence may show that the murder and the sexual assault, or attempt to commit sexual assault were all part of a continuous series of events that was really a single ongoing transaction. On the other hand, the evidence may indicate otherwise. [Emphasis added.]

[93]      I will begin by observing that this charge contains everything said on the “while committing” element in David Watt’s Watt’s Manual of Criminal Jury Instructions, 2nd ed. (Toronto: Carswell, 2015), at p. 719, and the Canadian Judicial Council – National Judicial Institute’s Model Jury Instructions (online: https://www.nji-inm.ca/index.cfm/publications/model-jury-instructions/).

[94]      The trial judge’s charge, however, did go farther than these model charges. Mr. Niemi’s complaints about the legal content of the charge are primarily with what was added. He also contends, relying in part on the model instruction in Gerry Ferguson and Michael R. Dambrot, CRIMJI: Canadian Criminal Jury Instructions, loose-leaf, 4th ed. (Vancouver: Continuing Legal Education Society of British Columbia, 2014), at para. 6.42-20, that other legally correct detail should have been added in the particular circumstances of his case.

[95]      First, Mr. Niemi contends that the direction, “[t]he acts constituting the sexual assault or the attempted sexual assault, may have been committed before the act that caused Ms. Watson’s death, or afterwards,” is wrong in law. He says that if the acts are committed after the murder, there is no underlying sexual assault and no continuing domination.

[96]      As explained above, Mr. Niemi’s view of the law is incorrect. It is not the case that the sexual activity must necessarily precede death for s. 231(5)(b) to operate. It is not a misdirection to point out that a s. 231(5)(b) conviction can occur where death comes first.

[97]      Mr. Niemi’s second and more multi-faceted complaint about the jury direction is that, regardless of what will ordinarily suffice, his case called for a more complete description of the law. Although he did not use this term, his position at trial was that, if the jury linked him to the crime, his sexual misconduct was simply a “post-script” to a killing that had already happened, and his post-mortem violation of the victim could amount in law to nothing more than an indignity to a body. Accordingly, on the particular facts of his case, he urges that a direction to the effect that it does not matter whether the murder occurred before or after death was misleading.

[98]      Moreover, while there may be no need to deal expressly with the “causal connection” requirement in cases where it is self-evident that there is a causal connection (as in cases where the sexual acts precede or coincide with the murder), Mr. Niemi’s contention is that there was no causal connection in this case. The trial judge was therefore obliged to tell the jury about the causal connection requirement so they could evaluate his defence to the first degree murder classification, and so the jury would appreciate that s. 231(5)(b) is aimed at murders made more heinous because they occur during the unlawful domination of another. He says that it was critical to bring this home to the jury in his case because he did not sexually dominate Ms. Watson, as she was dead before the sexual misconduct arose.

[99]      Mr. Niemi argues that, to make matters worse, the trial judge’s explanation of the “while committing” requirement would have left the jury with the impression that nothing more than a temporal connection is needed. He submits that the use of the phrase “connected through time,” in the following sentence would invite this understanding:

A single, ongoing transaction is a sequence of events or course of conduct that is interrelated or linear, ongoing and connected throughout in time.

[100]   I will begin with this last point. In my view, while it could have been clearer, even in isolation this passage does not import that a link in time is sufficient to meet the “while committing” requirement. Its inclusion of the phrase, a “sequence of events or course of conduct that is interrelated,” suggests that more than a temporal connection is required.

[101]   As always, the charge must be read as a whole. It is worth mentioning that this charge included the standard description of the “single event” concept found in model jury charges, language that was no doubt selected because it communicates effectively that more than a temporal connection is required for the murder and underlying offence to be linked.

[102]   As well, immediately after describing the law the trial judge outlined the Crown position and the defence position. In each case the focus was not on time, but on whether the acts were linked. The Crown position was essentially that the entire sequence of events – the strangulation and the sexual assault – were part of the same transaction either because the attack was part of an overall assault that was sexual in nature, or, alternatively, because the attack became sexual when Mr. Niemi removed Ms. Watson’s clothes and cut her body. The defence position was that the sexual misconduct, “[e]ven though not separated by a great deal of time,” was not linked to the killing but rather “a diversion, carried out after the murder as a distinct series of acts.”

[103]   I appreciate that at this juncture, the trial judge was describing submissions and not directing the jury on the law per se. Still, the jury would understand that the trial judge would not trouble them with pointless arguments. They would have appreciated that since those arguments highlight both the causal and temporal connections, more than a temporal connection is required.

[104]   When the charge is read as a whole, it is evident that the jury would not have been misled by the impugned passage into thinking that only a temporal connection is needed.

[105]   Mr. Niemi’s remaining complaints respecting the legal content of the charge stand or fall together. I refer, of course, to his claims that the trial judge was required to (1) make the causal connection requirement explicit, (2) communicate that the underlying principle at stake is that a murder is particularly heinous when someone who is already being dominated is killed, and (3) refrain from misleading the jury into thinking that the sequence of death and sexual activity are unimportant. These three complaints each depend upon the integrity of the defence theory that the sexual activity was a post-mortem post-script to a murder that had already occurred. On the evidence in this case, however, this theory lacks integrity.

[106]   There was not, in my view, a realistic foundation in the evidence for the contention that Mr. Niemi did no more than an indignity to Ms. Watson’s body. I say this because the Mr. Big confession was punctuated by Mr. Niemi’s physical demonstration of the sequence of events when Ms. Watson was killed. In his demonstration, he depicted an unbroken transition from strangulation to sexual interference. He showed how immediately after strangling Ms. Watson with her own purse strap, he set about cutting her clothing without pause or interruption. Her posture had not even changed. In my view, there is simply no air of reality to the prospect that Mr. Niemi may have instantaneously decided to sexually violate his victim in the fleeting instant between ending the strangulation and beginning to cut her sweater. Simply put, while legally a temporal link alone is not enough to satisfy the “while committing” test, in this case, an immediacy between fatal violence and sexual interference makes manifest that the murder and sexualized conduct occurred during the same transaction, a sexualized killing. Since Ms. Watson died in a sexual killing, the necessary causal link is inevitable. Had the trial judge said more about the “while committing” requirement and the facts of this case, it would not have been helpful to Mr. Niemi.

[107]   In saying this, I am mindful of the evidence that the incisions to Ms. Watson’s body occurred after her heart stopped, and that her pants may have been removed after she was dragged. These acts were not the beginning of the sexual interference. The cutting of Ms. Watson’s clothing was, and this act followed seamlessly on the immediate heels of the act of strangulation.

[108]   Once again, I have also borne in mind Mr. Niemi’s claim that he began the task of making the killing of Ms. Watson look like a sexual assault after he had “finished the job” of strangling her to death. He may have finished the acts he needed to bring about death, but this does not provide a basis for doubting that the sexual misconduct was part of the same transaction as the strangulation.

[109]   Ultimately, the only realistic scenario available on the evidence was that Mr. Niemi strangled Ms. Watson and intentionally interfered with her sexual dignity in one single transaction. Functionally, there was no need for the trial judge to burden the jury with a detailed legal back-story about rules and principles that could not apply. In my view, the jury direction on the “while committing” issue was adequate.

(5)         Did the Trial Judge Err by Not Relating the Evidence to the “While Committing” Requirement?
[110]   Finally, Mr. Niemi submits that the trial judge committed a non-direction amounting to a misdirection by not relating the evidence to the “while committing” issue. Once again, I disagree. Given that the defence theory that Mr. Niemi did no more than interfere with a corpse was not realistically on the table, the trial judge adequately linked the evidence to the issue.