 

IX.  Analysis

 

[52]   In considering whether the Crown has established the elements of the offences beyond a reasonable doubt, I intend to review the evidence in accordance with the arguments advanced by the defence:

 

        1.      Inconsistencies in the complainant’s own evidence;

 

        2.      Inconsistencies in the complainant’s evidence as compared to the evidence of other witnesses, including evidence regarding the so-called alibi; and 

 

        3.      Circumstances around the timing of the complainant’s reporting of the allegation to Child Protection in January of 2015.

 

1.  Inconsistencies in the complainant’s own evidence

 

[53]   The defence makes a number of submissions in relation to the complainant’s own evidence, including: 1) the complainant’s evidence as to her age at the time of the alleged incident; and, 2) the complainant’s testimony generally (and in particular the defence points out the complainant recalls specifics of the actual incident very clearly yet the complainant has a “foggy” recollection in relation to a number of other matters).

 

[54]   The defence argues strenuously that the complainant’s own evidence is inconsistent as to her age at the time of the alleged incident.  To recap, the complainant was born in late June 1991. The complainant agrees that she turned 9 years of age in late June of 2000.  The Indictment alleges the offences occurred on or  between June 1 and September 30, 2000.  As such, during the timeline encompassed in the Indictment, the complainant would have been 8 years of age and then turned 9 years of age in late June 2000.  The complainant’s evidence is that the incident occurred in June after she had arrived home from school, and as pointed out by defence, the so-called window for the offences is quite narrow, namely late June of 2000.  The complainant’s initial evidence was that she was around 9 or 10 years of age at the time of the incident, though she could not exactly remember her age.  She was pressed on cross-examination and initially reiterated that she was 9 or 10 years of age.  However, the complainant agreed that she told the police that she was “around 9" years of age.  She acknowledged on cross-examination that she could have been 11 years of age.  She agrees that she did not advise the police that she could have been 11 years of age.  In summary, the complainant’s evidence is that she was 9, 10 or 11 years of age – but not 8.  The complainant reiterated on cross-examination that although she could not exactly remember her age at the time of the incident, she does clearly remember the event.  The complainant agrees that she lived in New Brunswick in the summer of 2000.   She notes that she was back and forth a lot (namely, as between New Brunswick and Prince Edward Island) and that she spent her entire life going to different schools and living in different homes.  She agrees that she attended school in New Brunswick for grades 4 and part of grade 5 but she also attended school in Prince Edward Island for part of grade 5, as well as grade 6.

 

[55]   The complainant is firm in her evidence that the incident occurred in June after she came home from school and that when the incident occurred she and her mother were living at the Canoe Cove property.  She is certain she was attending elementary school in Prince Edward Island when the incident happened.

 

[56]   The defence argues that these “range of ages” as provided by the complainant go directly to her credibility and the reliability of her evidence.  The defence also advances a pointed argument in relation to the complainant’s age in the context of the Indictment.  Defence argues that even if the court “fully believes” the complainant, the court would be precluded from convicting the accused given that based on the complainant’s own evidence, the alleged incident may very well have occurred outside the dates of the Indictment and that, as such, there is reasonable doubt as to whether the alleged incident occurred within the dates set out on the Indictment.

 


[57]   As noted, the defence also argues the complainant recalls some details very clearly; for example, including where the complainant was lying on the bed in relation to her mother and the specifics of the actual touching, yet the complainant has a “foggy” recollection in relation to a number of other matters.  The complainant’s testimony is that her memory of the actual incident is “very clear”.  While I am called upon to consider all of the complainant’s testimony, and in fact the totality of all of the testimony, in assessing the complainant’s credibility and reliability, I reject any suggestion that because the complainant recalls the alleged incident with specificity, yet does not recall other matters with the same level of specificity, this leads to a conclusion that she is not credible and that her evidence is not reliable.  I reiterate that the alleged incident occurred over 18 years ago.  I am reminded of the guidance provided by the Supreme Court of Canada in W.(R.) at page 134: 


 

... Every person giving testimony in court, of whatever age, is an individual, whose credibility and evidence must be assessed by reference to criteria appropriate to her mental development, understanding and ability to communicate. But I would add this. In general, where an adult is testifying as to events which occurred when she was a child, her credibility should be assessed according to criteria applicable to her as an adult witness. Yet with regard to her evidence pertaining to events which occurred in childhood, the presence of inconsistencies, particularly as to peripheral matters such as time and location, should be considered in the context of the age of the witness at the time of the events to which she is testifying. [emphasis added]


                                                       

[58]   It is not surprising to me that a complainant of a sexual offence may have a clear recollection of the details of the incident and a so-called foggy recollection of other matters.

 

2.  Inconsistencies in the complainant’s evidence as compared to the evidence of other witnesses

 

[59]   The defence highlights inconsistencies in the complainant’s evidence as compared to the evidence of other witnesses particularly in relation to the following:

 

        a)      Evidence as to whether the complainant and her mother were living together at the Canoe Cove property during the time period set out in the Indictment.

 

        b)      Evidence as to whether the complainant disclosed the alleged incident to her brother MP.

 

        c)      Evidence as to the specifics of the alleged incident as detailed by the complainant at trial as compared to the version told to the complainant’s former boyfriend/friend CS.

 

a)      Evidence re residence

 


[60]   The complainant is firm in her testimony that at the time of the alleged incident she and her mother were living together at the Canoe Cove property, and further, that no one else was living with them.  She is also firm in her testimony that the incident occurred in June after she had arrived home from school.  The complainant was questioned about her residences and certainly she acknowledges that as a child she lived with her mother and her father on separate occasions and further she was “tossed around” to a lot of family members.  She lived in a number of different places, with a number of different people, both in New Brunswick and Prince Edward Island.

 

[61]   In contrast to the complainant’s evidence that she and her mother were living at the Canoe Cove property when the incident occurred, is the evidence of other witnesses which indicates otherwise. 

 

[62]   Of particular significance is the evidence of the complainant’s brother, KL, and his girlfriend at the time, DG.  Both KL and DG testified that during the timeframe set out in the Indictment (June 1 to September 30, 2000), they lived together in the Canoe Cove property.  They both specifically recall DG was pregnant at the time and their daughter was born in late November 2000.  I note in particular the evidence of DG that neither the complainant, nor the accused, lived with the DG and KL during this time period at the Canoe Cove property.  DG agrees that certainly the complainant and the accused would have visited at the Canoe Cove property and that there may very well have been a party during occasions when they visited.

 

[63]   A number of other witnesses provided testimony regarding where the accused, and the complainant, were living during the relevant time period.  The complainant’s brother MP testified that after his parents separated, he and his father moved to New Brunswick and his sister remained in Prince Edward Island.  However, there were also occasions when the complainant lived with him and his father.  MP testified that during the summer months, including the summer of 2000, he and the complainant returned to Prince Edward Island and stayed with an aunt and uncle on Lennox Island. 

 

[64]   RS, the complainant’s aunt, testified that in the summers of 1999 and 2000, both RS and the accused worked at a lodge in New Brunswick.  RS recalls the children (including the complainant) being around at the lodge in the summers of 1999 and 2000.  RS agrees however that there would be large chunks of time between June 1 to September 30, 2000 where she would not be able to account for the complainant’s residence. 

 

[65]   In summary, the position of the defence is that the evidence clearly establishes that during the timeline set out in the Indictment, the accused was not even living at the Canoe Cove property.  Arguably the strongest evidence on this point is the evidence of DG, the former girlfriend of the complaint’s brother KL.  To reiterate, DG testified that during the time period set out in the Indictment she was living with her boyfriend KL at the accused’s Canoe Cove property and she specifically recalls that she was pregnant at the time.  


 

[66]   The Crown emphasizes that this was not a family unit that essentially “bought one home” and lived in that home throughout.  Rather, the evidence suggests that this was a family unit that moved around a lot and further that the complainant was essentially in transit a lot, including in New Brunswick and Prince Edward Island.

 

[67]   Two submissions made by the Crown resonate with me.  First, the Crown submits that the evidence “does not preclude the possibility” that the incident occurred at the Canoe Cove property.  The Crown also submits there is “room to accept” the complainant’s evidence that the incident occurred at the Canoe Cove property (and I note the evidence of DG that the accused and the complainant visited DG and KL at the Canoe Cove property).

 

[68]   It bears repeating of course that this is a Criminal matter, that the accused is presumed innocent, and that the Crown carries the burden of establishing all elements of the offences beyond a reasonable doubt.  Stated bluntly, the test is not whether the evidence does or does not “preclude the possibility” that the incident occurred at the Canoe Cove property, nor is the test whether there is simply “room to accept” the complainant’s evidence that the incident occurred in the Canoe Cove home.  Rather, the test is whether the Crown has established the accused’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.  Defence emphasized this in closing submissions.  In response to any suggestion that the incident could have occurred on a so-called visit to the Canoe Cove property (when DG and KL were living there), the defence suggests that that is “pretty far fetched”, and furthermore, it simply does not “fit” and does not “line up” with the complainant’s evidence surrounding the incident including: the complainant had arrived home from school; she and her mother were residing in the Canoe Cove property; her mother was having a party; the complainant went to her own bedroom; the complainant heard her mother going to her mother’s bedroom; and, the complainant specifically left her own bedroom and went to her mother’s bedroom.

 

b)     Evidence as to whether the complainant disclosed the incident to her brother MP

 

[69]   The complainant’s evidence is that she is “sure” she told her brother MP about the incident.  She did not tell him at the time of the incident, but she did tell him within the last four years.  The evidence of the complainant’s brother, MP, is otherwise.  MP’s evidence is that the complainant never told him about the incident. MP testified that he was told about the allegations by his mother in the spring or summer of 2018.  The defence argues that the complainant is either mistaken, misrepresenting or “lying”.  To be clear, whether the complainant did or did not tell her brother, or anyone else, does not make her more or less credible, or make her evidence more or less reliable.  We must all be careful not to approach evidence with myths, unwarranted assumptions or stereotypes about sexual offences, including what an individual who has been sexually assaulted will or will not do or say.

 

[70]   Nevertheless, the defence emphasizes that there is a clear conflict in the evidence on this point and the conflict impacts negatively on the complainant in terms of her credibility as well as the reliability of her evidence.

 

c)      Comparison of the complainant’s version of the incident given at trial as compared to the version provided to CS

 

[71]   The defence also points to the complainant’s evidence regarding the details of the incident as relayed at trial as compared to the evidence of CS, the complainant’s former boyfriend/friend.  The complainant gave very specific evidence regarding the incident.  To recap, her evidence is that after she got home from school, she went to her bedroom as her mother had people over and there was drinking, marijuana and smoking.  She heard her mother go into the mother’s bedroom and the complainant then went into her mother’s bedroom.  The accused was already in the bed and the complainant got into bed with her mother.  The alleged touching then occurred.  The complainant testified that after the touching she left her mother’s bedroom and went back to her own bedroom. 

 

[72]   However, CS gave evidence regarding the version as relayed to him by the complainant, which differed fairly significantly from the version as relayed by the complainant at trial.  CS testified that the complainant told him the incident occurred not in the accused’s bedroom but rather in the complainant’s bedroom.  The complainant had been asleep and was awoken by her mother coming into her bedroom.  The complainant initially thought her mother was confused and disoriented about which room she was in.  However, the accused then got under the covers with the complainant, and touched the complainant in a sexual way.

 

[73]   CS testified as follows on direct examination:


 

... she had told me some things and one of the things that she told me was whenever she was a young girl ... she was in her bedroom and she was awoken by her mother coming in the bedroom and getting under the covers with her and she had stated to me upset like that when her mother got in bed with her, she knew that she was intoxicated, that she was partying. She stated to me that her mother then touched in a sexual way.


 

[74]   CS also testified as follows on cross-examination:

 


 

Q.      Okay and you just testified that [the complainant] told you that her mother came into her bedroom, went into her bed when she was already in bed and fondled her, correct?


 

A.      Had touched her in a sexual way.  She didn’t describe how or how, how long or whether she stayed in there the night or whether she left the bedroom immediately and realized it was wrong.  She never stated that to me.  I never questioned her.


 

Q.      Just that her mother followed her into her bedroom?


 

A.      No, her - she was asleep and her mother, after the party was over, her - at first she told me that she had thought she was, her mother was a little disoriented and confused in which room that she was going into, but then whenever she had went under the covers with her, that’s when she had realized that her mother was quite aware that, that she was in that bed.  


 

[75]   It is difficult to reconcile these two versions. 

 

[76]   The Crown’s position is that the actual location of the alleged incident, namely whether the incident occurred in the complainant’s bedroom or the accused’s bedroom is not a “peripheral” matter but rather it is fairly central, namely where the alleged incident occurred. 

 

[77]   The Crown’s position as well is that it is appropriate for the court to consider the inconsistencies, namely in the evidence of the complainant as compared to the evidence in the version as relayed by CS.  However, the Crown urges the court, in weighing the evidence, to consider the nature of the circumstances that the complainant was in when she made the disclosure to CS, suggesting that the complainant really was not likely in the “best state” and that the complainant’s relaying of the incident to CS at that time may very well not have been in a reliable fashion. 

 

3.   Circumstances that existed around the time that the complainant made the disclosure to Child Protection in January 2015

 

[78]   The position of the defence is that the complainant had a “motive to fabricate” the allegation against her mother, given the circumstances that existed, namely the underlying custody and related dispute as between the complainant and her mother, as well as the potential financial consequences (related to the child tax credit).  It is worthwhile to review the complainant’s evidence on these points.

 

[79]   The complainant’s daughter was born in the fall of 2012.  While it is not necessary to review all of the evidence in relation to the years after the birth of the complainant’s child, I would observe it appears the complainant had some challenges and struggles.  In January of 2014, the accused took over care of the complainant’s daughter and the complainant attempted to address her alcohol issues.  The complainant’s daughter remained in the care of the accused throughout the 2014 year. The complainant was questioned on cross-examination regarding the child tax benefit.  Defence counsel put to the complainant that she continued to receive the child tax benefit for the duration of the 2014 year (notwithstanding her daughter was in the care of the accused).  The complainant initially responded that she never cashed any of the child tax benefit cheques and that they are “still unclaimed”.  The complainant then indicated that she had never actually received the cheques as the cheques were going to a different address, namely an address where the complainant was no longer residing.

 

[80]   The complainant agreed that in January of 2015, the accused advised the complainant that she was going to apply for the child tax benefit.  The complainant was questioned by defence counsel as to her response.  The complainant denies that she threatened her mother, and does not recall whether she yelled at her mother.  She suggests that she may have been upset and simply asked what was going on.

 

[81]   The complainant agrees she first reported the allegations to the authorities, not the police, but rather Child Protection Services, on January 14, 2015.  In response to the question on cross-examination, suggesting that it is “a bit peculiar” the complainant decided to report the alleged incident mere weeks after the accused had told the complainant of the accused’s intention to apply for the child tax benefit, the complainant saw this as the accused seeking custody and the potential for the accused to hurt the complainant’s daughter for years.

 

[82]   The complainant was questioned on cross-examination as to what steps she did, or did not take after the accused filed the motion for custody of the complainant’s daughter in March of 2015.  The complainant provided fairly emotional testimony regarding this time period, including that she brought her concerns to her social worker.  She was pressed on cross-examination including the fact she did not participate in the custody hearing, and her evidence is that she was essentially beaten down, her heart was broken and she viewed the system, namely social services to be against her. 

 

[83]   The defence argues that the complainant’s explanation of this reporting is not in accordance with common sense.  The defence highlights the fact that the complainant’s child had been in the accused’s care for a year, namely since January of 2014 and yet the complainant only reported the allegations to Child Protection after the accused expressed her intention to apply for the child tax benefit.  The defence argues this is very “suspicious”. 

 

X.  Conclusion

 

[84]   I will now return to the question before me namely, whether the Crown has established the accused’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.  To reiterate, this is not simply a question of whether I “believe” the complainant.  I would note that considered in isolation – namely, in a vacuum – the complainant’s testimony regarding the incident is quite compelling.  She relayed in a significant amount of detail the actual incident and the circumstances leading up to the incident.  However, I am troubled, and have a number of concerns, given the totality of the evidence.  I will review these concerns. 

 

[85]   First and foremost, what is particularly problematic in the Crown’s case relates to the Canoe Cove property.  The complainant is adamant that she was living at the Canoe Cove property with her mother at the time of the alleged incident.  The dates on the Indictment are June 1 to September 30, 2000.  The complainant alleges the incident occurred in June after she got home from school.  However, there was significant evidence before the court that during the timeframe set out in the Indictment, neither the accused nor the complainant were residing in the Canoe Cove property.  The evidence of both KL and his girlfriend at the time, DG, is that they were residing together in the Canoe Cove property.  They both noted as well what could be characterized as a time marker, namely DG was pregnant at the time and their child was born in late November 2000.  There was evidence that both the accused and the complainant visited KL and DG at the Canoe Cove property, and I note the evidence of DG that there “possibly” could have been parties during these visits.  As noted, the Crown argues the evidence does not “preclude the possibility” that the offences nevertheless occurred at the Canoe Cove property (namely, suggesting that the offences could have occurred when the accused and the complainant were visiting).  I am reminded of the often-quoted comments of the Supreme Court of Canada in Lifchus, where Cory J. suggests the following charge to a jury:


 

The accused enters these proceedings presumed to be innocent.  That presumption of innocence remains throughout the case until such time as the Crown has on the evidence put before you satisfied you beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused is guilty. 


 

[86]   The question before me is not whether the evidence “precludes the possibility” of the incident occurring at the Canoe Cove property; rather, the question before me is whether the Crown has established beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused is guilty.

 

[87]   The complainant also testified that she advised her brother MP of the incident.  This is in direct contrast to her brother’s evidence.  The evidence of the complainant’s brother is that the complainant has never advised him of the incident and rather, he became aware of the incident when the accused, his mother, told him of the allegation in the spring or summer of 2018.  This contradiction in the evidence is concerning to me and does impact on the complainant’s credibility and reliability.  To be clear, I am in no way suggesting or concluding that if the incident “really happened”, the complainant would have told her brother.  I reject any such stereotypical assumption or myth.  However, I do need to assess the overall credibility and reliability of the complainant, including contradictions and inconsistencies.  On this point, there is a clear contradiction.

 

[88]   The evidence of CS, when compared to the complainant’s version, is also concerning.  CS gave evidence that in 2007, the complainant disclosed the incident to him.  However, the details as relayed by the complainant to CS are quite different than the details as relayed by the complainant at trial.  To reiterate, the complainant’s evidence is that the complainant was in her own bedroom; she heard her mother go to her mother’s bedroom; the complainant then left her own bedroom and went to her mother’s bedroom; her mother was in bed; and, the complainant got into bed with her mother.   However, the evidence of CS is that the complainant told him that the complainant was in her own room in her own bed; the accused came into the complainant’s bedroom; and, the accused then got under the covers with the complainant.

 

[89]   The defence also focusses on the so-called timeline, including in particular the fact the complainant made the allegation to the Child Protection authorities in January of 2015.  The defence emphasizes the underlying facts at the time: the complainant’s daughter had been in care of the accused for the 2014 year; and, in January of 2015 the accused advised the complainant that the accused was going to apply for the child tax benefit in relation to the complainant’s child.  The defence argues it is very “suspicious” that it was only after the accused advised that she was going to apply for the child tax benefit that the complainant then made the disclosure to the Child Protection authorities.  I would note that the complainant’s evidence is that she essentially saw this – namely, the accused’s intention to apply for the child tax benefit – as the accused seeking custody.  The complainant was very concerned about the accused raising the complainant’s daughter and the potential of the accused harming her daughter.  I make no finding whether the complainant “fabricated” the allegation because of the underlying custody/child tax benefit issues, or for any other reason.  Rather, I am considering the totality of the evidence in considering whether the Crown has met its burden.

 

[90]   The defence also advances arguments in relation to the complainant’s age at the time of the alleged incident, arguing the complainant’s evidence as to her age is inconsistent.  It is not particularly surprising to me that the complainant, now in her late 20s, may not be able to recall her specific age when a sexual incident occurred – an incident that occurred many years ago.  However, I must consider the totality of the evidence – including the credibility and reliability of the complainant’s evidence within the parameters of the Indictment, in considering whether the Crown has established the accused’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.

 