LAW

Section 265(1)(a) of the Criminal Code of Canada provides that everyone commits an assault when he, without the consent of the other person, applies force intentionally to that person either directly or indirectly. 

Section 267(1)(b) provides that everyone who, in committing an assault, causes bodily harm is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years. 

Section 21(1)(a), (b) and (c) of the Criminal Code provides that everyone is a party to an offence if, the person actually commits the offence, if the person omits to do anything for the purpose of aiding any other person to commit the offence or, if the person abets any other person in the commission of the offence.

Pursuant to s. 265(1)(a) of the Criminal Code, if force is applied intentionally and with the consent of the complainant, the accused will not be found culpable.  However, even if there is consent to engage in a fist fight or a brawl, that consent, on the part of the complainant, is vitiated at a point where the combatant intentionally applies force to cause serious bodily harm or non trivial bodily injury.  See:  R. v. Jobidon (1991), 1991 CanLII 77 (SCC), 66 C.C.C. (3d) 454 (S.C.C.). 

Pursuant to s. 267(2) of the Criminal Code, bodily harm means:

any hurt or injury to the complainant that interferes with the health or comfort of the complainant and that is more than merely transient or trifling in nature.

The words "transient or trifling in nature"  have been interpreted to include injuries spanning a short period of time and an injury of a minor degree which results in a minor degree of distress.  See:  R. v. Dickson (1988), 1988 CanLII 2824 (BC CA), 42 C.C.C. (3d) 318 (Yukon Terr. C.A.).

With respect to s. 21(1) of the Criminal Code, former Chief Justice Dickson stated in Thatcher v. Queen (1987), 1987 CanLII 53 (SCC), 32 C.C.C. (3d) 481 (S.C.C.) at p. 508 as follows:

This provision is designed to make the difference between aiding and abetting and personally committing an offence legally irrelevant.  It provides that either mode of committing an offence is equally culpable and, indeed, that whether a person personally commits or only aids or abets, he is guilty of that offence ...

And further at page 511 he states:

Thus, s. 21 has been designed to alleviate the necessity for the Crown choosing between two different forms of participation in a criminal offence.  The law stipulates that both forms of participation are not only equally culpable but should be treated as one single mode of incurring criminal liability.  The Crown is not under a duty to separate the different forms of participation in a criminal offence into different counts. 

The terms "aid" and "abet" are frequently used conjunctively; however, it is sufficient for the Crown to prove only one or the other as a basis of liability.  See:  R. v. Meston (1975), 1975 CanLII 1449 (ON CA), 28 C.C.C. (2d) 497 at 503-504 (Ont. C.A.).  Culpability arises on the proof by the Crown of the act and the intent of the accused along with the fact that the principal committed the crime.  See: R. v. Cunnigham (1937), 1937 CanLII 393 (ON CA), 68 C.C.C. 176 (Ont.C.A.).  Thus by virtue of s. 21(1)(b) and (c), while a party has not committed the actus reas or mens rea of a crime, he or she may nevertheless incur liability.

It appears clear that a party's conduct must be "for the purpose" of aiding the principal.  These words appear in s. 21(1)(b) with respect to aiding and they have been read into s. 21(1)(c) with respect to abetting.  See:  R. v. Curran (1977), 1977 ALTASCAD 284 (CanLII), 38 C.C.C. (2d) 151 at 156 (Alta. S.C.A.D.).  The conduct, whether it be words or action must, therefore, have been undertaken with the intent of assisting or encouraging the criminal act of the principal.  The Crown must, therefore, prove the accused embarked upon this conduct to aid or abet the principal in the commission of the offence.  See:  R. v. Curran, supra.


In Dunlop and Sylvester v. The Queen (1979), 1979 CanLII 20 (SCC), 47 C.C.C. (2d) 93 (S.C.C.), Mr. Justice Dickson (as he then was) stated at p. 106:

Mere presence at the scene of a crime is not sufficient to ground culpability.  Something more is needed: encouragement of the principal offender; an act which facilitates the commission of the offence, such as keeping watch or enticing the victim away, or an act which tends to prevent or hinder interference with accomplishment of the criminal act, such as preventing the intended victim from escaping or being ready to assist the prime culprit.

The burden of proving the charge against the two accused remains with the Crown throughout.  At no time is there any burden upon the accused persons to prove their innocence, and the Crown must prove their guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.  If the accused give or present evidence as to their defence which might reasonably be true, the accused have raised a reasonable doubt and thus I must acquit.  Put another way, if the accuseds' story or explanation is one which might reasonably be true, the Crown has failed to discharge the onus upon it of proving the guilt of the accused beyond a reasonable doubt.  See:  R. v. Oraniuk (1990), 1990 CanLII 2647 (PE SCAD), 84 Nfld. & P.E.I. R. 157 (P.E.I.S.C.A.D.).

BODILY HARM

I find that as a result of the altercation and the assault upon Thibodeau's person at the University of Prince Edward Island on October 18, 1992, he suffered bodily harm.  The nature of the injuries as outlined above are certainly well beyond those of a transient and trifling nature.  Indeed, as far as his left eye is concerned, the injury appears to be permanent. 

John Troy Chaisson

Considering the evidence and the applicable law outlined above, I find the Crown has proven beyond a reasonable doubt Chaisson committed an assault on Thibodeau by kicking him and thereby caused Thibodeau bodily injury.  Accordingly, Chaisson is guilty as charged.

I accept the evidence of Lisa Gaudet and Peter Gant that Chaisson kicked Thibodeau at least four or five times in the face when Thibodeau was lying on the ground, unconscious.  Even if I accept the evidence of Paul David Gallant that he also kicked Thibodeau in the head rendering him unconscious, there remains sufficient evidence to convince me beyond a reasonable doubt that Chaisson applied force intentionally and without the consent of Thibodeau thereby causing him bodily harm. 

The position adopted by Chaisson that Peter Gant could have caused the injuries by jumping on Thibodeau's head could not reasonably be true.  I do not accept that Mr. Gant jumped on Thibodeau's head in a careless or reckless fashion so as to cause injury.  Mr. Gant was acting out of grave concern for Thibodeau and, as it turns out, he acted wisely.  He placed himself over Thibodeau's head to protect Thibodeau, not to injure him.

The evidence of Mr. Gallant that Thibodeau was brandishing a broken beer bottle in the direction of Chaisson was not corroborated by any other witnesses.  The security officers or policemen investigating the altercation did not observe a broken bottle in the area, nor did they observe any indication from Chaisson's person that he had been attacked with a bottle.  Even if I were to accept the evidence of Mr. Gallant that Thibodeau was swinging a broken beer bottle and was about to hit Thibodeau and therefore he acted to protect Chaisson, that is irrelevant with respect to the culpability of Chaisson.  If Mr. Gallant kicked Thibodeau for the aforesaid reasons, this is no excuse or reason why Chaisson had to kick Thibodeau in the face a number of times when Thibodeau was lying unconscious on the ground.

Furthermore, Mr. Gallant gave no evidence to the effect that Chaisson did not kick Thibodeau after he was knocked unconscious.  There was a period of time after Mr. Gallant kicked Thibodeau when Mr. Gallant turned his back on Chaisson and started walking back to the car.  It was during this time Chaisson had the opportunity to kick Thibodeau.


Initially the fight between Chaisson and Thibodeau could be termed consensual; however, there reached a point, particularly when Thibodeau was rendered unconscious where he did not consent.  By kicking Thibodeau when he was unconscious, Chaisson went far beyond the scope of any consent which may have been given by Thibodeau to become involved in a consensual fist fight.  Therefore, even if there was consent on the part of Thibodeau to engage in the fight, that consent did not extend to the point where he consented to being kicked in the face or head after being rendered unconscious, thereby causing Thibodeau serious bodily harm.

Rodney Joseph Ellsworth

The evidence of Thibodeau and Lisa Gaudet is that Ellsworth approached the fight between Thibodeau and Chaisson, grabbed Thibodeau by the shoulder, turned him around and punched him on the side of the head rendering him unconscious.  Peter Gant who observed much about the fight did not observe Ellsworth hitting Thibodeau.  Mr. Gant was near the fight at all times except when he moved a short distance away in an attempt to get Jamie Compton's assistance.  The evidence of John Chisholm, who also observed the fight for a period of time and who saw Chaisson's shoe fly into the air, did not see Ellsworth hit Thibodeau.

Lisa Gaudet, who says Ellsworth hit Thibodeau, gave a statement to the police a short time after the incident.  She admitted that her memory was clearer at the time she made the statement than when she gave evidence at the trial.  In her statement she does not mention Ellsworth hitting Thibodeau, although she does indicate that Chaisson kicked Thibodeau.  As well, she indicates that he hit Jamie Compton (also known as "Bubba"). 

I find it difficult to accept that if she observed Ellsworth hit Thibodeau she would not have mentioned this in her statement given to the police shortly after the incident.  She also said in her evidence that John Chisholm attempted to assist Thibodeau and in doing so, he was hit by Ellsworth.  The evidence of Chisholm does not support this.  He says he did not try to interfere in the fight with Thibodeau and Chaisson, but rather attempted to assist Compton in his fight with Ellsworth. 

Ellsworth denies he hit Thibodeau.  The evidence of Angie MacLeod corroborates the evidence of Ellsworth.  She had Ellsworth in her view throughout most of the incident except for a short period of time when she left to attempt to start the car.  I found her evidence to be credible and I accept it.

I am unable to accept the Crown's argument that Ms. MacLeod may have been at the car when Ellsworth allegedly hit Thibodeau.  According to the sequence of events related by Lisa Gaudet, Ellsworth hit Jamie Compton before he hit Thibodeau.  Ms. MacLeod states she had gone to the car and returned to the scene before Ellsworth had hit Jamie Compton.  Therefore, she must have been at the scene, and not at the car, when Ellsworth is alleged to have hit Thibodeau.  I accept that Ms. MacLeod had Ellsworth in her sight at all material times, and I accept her evidence that she did not see Ellsworth hit Thibodeau.

Ellsworth states that Lisa Gaudet attempted to arouse Compton to get him to assist Thibodeau.  When Compton got up and appeared intent on entering the fray, Ellsworth says he hit him.  He also admits to hitting Chisholm who states he was attempting to assist Compton.  Ellsworth states that when he approached the Chaisson/Thibodeau fight it was over, as he met Chaisson walking away.  This is consistent with the evidence of Angie MacLeod who stated that she saw Ellsworth approach the fight but never reach it because it had ended before he got there.

Thibodeau's identification of Ellsworth was only for a split second as he turned him around and before he was punched.  At this time he had been fighting Chaisson for a few minutes and had taken a few punches.  It is quite possible he may have been mistaken in his split second identification of the individual who hit him.  After all, it was the first time he had seen Ellsworth that night.

In my view, the version of events as related by Ellsworth and MacLeod could, in the circumstances, reasonably be true.  As the accused's version of events might reasonably be true, the Crown has not discharged the onus of proving beyond a reasonable doubt that Ellsworth did directly strike Thibodeau.


The matter does not end here.  I must also consider whether or not Ellsworth is guilty by reason of his presence, and his assault on Jamie Compton and John Chisholm.  Thus, if Ellsworth is found to have assisted Chaisson or encouraged Chaisson in committing an assault upon Thibodeau thereby causing him bodily harm, Ellsworth is also guilty of that offence.

Ellsworth says he punched Compton to prevent him from interfering in the fight between Chaisson and Thibodeau.  In Ellsworth's mind they were engaged in a fair fight - "one on one".  It was his opinion they should be permitted to fight without interference from other parties.  At this point in the fight, it is the evidence of Ellsworth, and others, that Thibodeau may have held the upper hand.  It therefore would not have appeared to Ellsworth that Thibodeau was going to suffer bodily harm at the hand of Chaisson. 

I am unable to conclude that from the outset, Chaisson and Ellsworth were acting together to carry out an assault or a crime of personal violence.  Although there is evidence that Chaisson had words with Sean Hartegan, a member of the Summerside group, when he and Ellsworth were in Blanchard Hall, there is no evidence that when he and Ellsworth left Blanchard Hall they did so with the intent of approaching the Summerside group to engage in a fight.  The more likely inference from the facts is that upon leaving Blanchard Hall, Chaisson noticed the group sitting on the grass.  He approached them asking for a cigarette and upon doing so continued his argument with Hartegan.  As well, he engaged in a fight with Thibodeau.  Ellsworth had continued to his car in the parking lot.  It was only when he noticed a shoving match or heard shouting that he returned to where Chaisson had stopped.  There is no evidence Chaisson asked Ellsworth to assist in any manner. 

When Ellsworth hit Compton, Chaisson and Thibodeau were engaged, at that time, in what might be termed a consensual fight.  Ellsworth could not reasonably have believed, in the circumstances, that Chaisson intended to commit an assault.  If Ellsworth had hindered interference by Jamie Compton at the time when Chaisson was kicking Thibodeau as he lay unconscious on the ground, the consequences would have been much different for him.  At this point, Chaisson was quite obviously committing an offence and any attempt by Ellsworth to hinder interference would have made him a party to that offence.

Ellsworth's purpose in hitting Compton, when he did, was not to encourage, facilitate, or hinder interference with the commission of an offence.  To the contrary, it was to permit the apparent willing combatants, Thibodeau and Chaisson, to fight "one on one".  I accept Ellsworth's statement of his intentions as one which could reasonably be true.  Therefore, I have a reasonable doubt that he hit Jamie Compton for the purpose of aiding or abetting Chaisson in the commission of an offence contrary to s. 267(1)(b) of the Criminal Code.

