There can be no doubt whatever that on any construction of the foregoing facts Dollan is guilty of at least second degree murder. It was and is the position of the Crown that the murder committed by Dollan becomes first degree murder by virtue of the operation of s. 214(5)(a) [rep. & sub. 1974-75-76, c. 105, s. 4] of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1970, c. C-34, the relevant parts of which are as follows:

214(5) Irrespective of whether a murder is planned and deliberate on the part of any person, murder is first degree murder in respect of a person when the death is caused by that person

(a) while committing or attempting to commit an offence under . . . [s.] 247 (kidnapping and forcible confinement);

It is of course apparent that the parenthesized words are inserted in s. 214 for convenience only. To determine the offence referred to in s. 214(5)(a) reference must be had to the appropriate section of the Code, in this case s. 247(2) which provides as follows:

247(2) Every one who, without lawful authority, confines, imprisons or forcibly seizes another person is guilty of an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for five years.

The learned trial judge explained to the jury the law with respect to murder and then went on to explain that Dollan would be guilty of first degree murder if he committed it while committing or attempting to commit an offence under s. 247(2). It is the position of the appellant Dollan that the only unlawful confinement that was committed or attempted at the time the murder occurred was simply incidental to the commission of robbery. It was argued that the unlawful confinement must be separate and independent and that the instructions to the jury should have reflected this concept. In my view this argument fails. In R. v. Gourgon (1979), 1981 CanLII 328 (BC CA), 19 C.R. (3d) 272, 58 C.C.C. (2d) 193, the British Columbia Court of Appeal considered this point (p. 279 C.R.):

It appears that the trial judge's concern with the purposes of confinement and, particularly, to impress upon the jury his view that there must be a purpose in addition to robbery stems from his interpretation and application of United States authorities such as People v. Daniels (1969), 80 Cal. Rptr. 897, 459 P. (2d) 225 (S.C.), and Re Earley (1975), 120 Cal. Rptr. 881, 534 P. (2d) 721 (S.C.). These cases involve the meaning to be given the word "kidnapping" in certain California legislation. The American courts developed ideas of to what extent transportation is a part of kidnapping and the nature of conduct substantially increasing risk of harm in the course of a robbery. I have already said kidnapping is not an element in this case. Moreover, in my opinion, the reasoning explained in those authorities is irrelevant to the interpretation and application of the two provisions of our Criminal Code on which this appeal depends. Nothing is expressed or implied in those sections about the purpose of the confinement. Neither is there anything in the history of the legislation to suggest a limitation of that nature to be placed upon the word "confinement". The interpretation that confinement for the one purpose of robbery is excluded cannot be supported. I think the jury should have been instructed that, if they not decided that Gourgon did murder the victim, that murder was first degree murder if the jury also found that the victim's death was caused by Gourgon while he was confining or attempting to confine any one or more of the three occupants of the residence.

With respect, I agree with these words of McFarlane J.A. It is of no consequence that the unlawful confinement may be incidental to the commission of some other crime as long as there has been an unlawful confinement contrary to s. 247 of the Criminal Code. The jury was correctly instructed on this issue and on this point the appellant Dollan must fail.

Cross-examination of Phyllis Kehoe

At some point following the terrible events of November 18th, Phyllis Kehoe gave a statement to the police. A copy of this statement was given to counsel for the accused and at trial Mrs. Kehoe was cross-examined on the contents of this statement by counsel for the appellant Newstead. I think it can be fairly stated that there was no essential difference in the testimony of Mrs. Kehoe and the statement given to the police. However, on several matters of detail Mrs. Kehoe admitted that she could remember neither the detail nor that part of the statement to the police. In the presentation of the defence, counsel for Newstead sought to call the police officer to prove the statement of Mrs. Kehoe as a contradictory statement. The trial judge declined to allow the defence to adduce this evidence. He was of the view that there was nothing contradictory in her statement and therefore the statement could not be proved as a previous contradictory statement. In my respectful view, the fact that Mrs. Kehoe did not remember some of the details contained in the statement may very well have made that statement contradictory in a limited sense and thereby entitled counsel for Newstead to call the police officer to prove the statement. However, it is not necessary to come to any final conclusion on this issue. Assuming, for the purpose of argument, that the statement was contradictory in the sense that I have mentioned, neither Newstead nor Dollan were prejudiced by the fact that Mrs. Kehoe's statement was not proved by calling an officer as a witness. Mrs. Kehoe did not deny making the statement in question. Quite the contrary, she admitted she gave a statement to the police and signed it; although the statement was not specifically identified and marked as an exhibit it is clear from the record and was doubtless clear to the jury that the statement in the hands of counsel for Newstead was the statement that Mrs. Kehoe had given to the police. In my view, the formal proof that this was so would have added nothing to the facts already apparent to the jury. The effect (if any) of the statement on the credibility of Mrs. Kehoe had already been accomplished. The fact that the police officer was not called to attest that the statement was in fact the statement of Mrs. Kehoe could not have caused any substantial wrong or miscarriage of justice.

Section 21 of the Criminal Code and the liability of Newstead

It would seem, and with great respect to the learned trial Judge, that in his summary these two subsections of s. 69 were not sufficiently distinguished in relation to the facts. In particular, the summary did not include a statement to the effect that the appellant could only be a party to the offence of murder under s-s. (1) of s. 69 if the jury thought Chow Bew had committed the murder and the appellant had aided or abetted Chow Bew in the commission of the murder, and the under s-s. (2) of s. 69 the appellant would be guilty only if the commission of the murder was known or ought to have been known by him to be a probable consequence of the prosecution of the robbery.

It is plain that when Estey J. speaks of aiding and abetting in the commission of the murder he is speaking of aiding and abetting in the acts which under s. 213 (s. 260) constitute murder not merely aiding and abetting in the underlying offence. If aiding and abetting in the underlying offence were sufficient to render a party guilty pursuant to s. 21(1)(b), (c) this section would become a far broader base of criminal liability than s. 21(2) which at least requires that murder be a foreseeable probable consequence of a first offence.

With respect I subscribe to the view of Estey J. that criminal responsibility for murder by a party pursuant to s. 21(1)(b), (c) requires aiding and abetting in the murder (i.e., the acts defined in s. 213 as murder and not merely the underlying offence).

The question remaining is whether the trial judge's instructions reflect this view. The trial judge, after dealing with the definition of murder as it applied to the acts of Dollan, then instructed the jury as follows:

But if you find that the accused, Dollan, did commit murder, as I have defined it, then, the next question you must direct your mind to is whether Miss Newstead is also guilty of that murder as a party to the offence, even if she did not discharge the gun.

You see, at this stage, we have defined murder. Now, you must decide whether Miss Newstead was a party to that offence of murder. In this respect, I want to call your attention to s. 21(1) of the Criminal Code, which reads:

21. (1) every one is a party to an offence who . . . . .

(b) does or omits to do anything for the purpose of aiding any person to commit it, or

(c) abets any person in committing it.

In other words, under this subsection, any person can become a party to an offence by aiding or abetting, not necessary both; one or the other. So if you find that the offence of murder has been committed, then, of course, the accused, Newstead, would be guilty if she aided or abetted in the commission of that crime, that is, the crime of murder.

The word "aid" of course, simply means to help or assist. The helping may consist of doing something or omitting to do something. On the other hand, the word "abet" means to encourage and to urge, to invite, to instigate a person into committing a crime. That is what "abet" means. And person who actually aid or abet in the commission of a crime are as guilty as the person who commits the crime.

Of course, to be guilty as a party, as I have defined it, there must be some actual participation, actual assistance rendered, or if reliance is on abetting, then, there must be some active encouraging or urging that the offence be carried out.

As suggested by Mr. Bryant in his address to you, a mere bystander is not sufficient. In other words, someone who passively acquiesces to the commission of a crime without aiding or abetting, of course, is not a party. To aid or abet the commission of a crime, the person must, in the terms that I have told you, must associate himself with the crime itself, with the criminal venture, by participating in it, trying to make it succeed or actively encourage it, urging it to occur.

Remember, it is not a crime to merely stand by, and that is so no matter how serious the offence.

In order for you to find the accused, Newstead, guilty on the basis of aiding or abetting, it is not sufficient for the Crown to prove only that her acts or omissions in fact had the effect of aiding or abetting the commission of the crime. The Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that she did the acts or omitted to do something for the purpose of, or with the intention of, aiding and/or abetting the commission of the crime.

If you found beyond a reasonable doubt that she was a party, and I defined it either as having aided or abetted, then, there is no need to consider what I am going to say about the second part of s. 21(1). But if you found that she is not a party, by virtue of the allegation of aiding or abetting, as I have defined it, then, you must consider s-s. 2 of s. 21.

I should perhaps, as a clarification, before I get to s-s. 2, indicate that in order to be a party under s-s. 1, which deals with the aiding or abetting, the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that, first of all, murder was committed by Dollan. That is, the Crown must prove, as I said before, that Dollan used a weapon or had it on his person during the time he committed or attempted to commit either robbery or forcible confinement, or during the time of flight after committing or attempting to commit either such offences, and death ensued as a consequence.

In other words, the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt, first of all, that murder was committed by Dollan. Secondly, in order to prove that Miss Newstead was a party, the Crown must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the acts or omissions of Miss Newstead had the effect of aiding or abetting the commission of that crime, and, further, that she did the acts or omitted to do something for the purpose of, and with the intention of, aiding or abetting the commission of the crime. The Crown must prove all of that beyond a reasonable doubt.

(Emphasis added.)

The trial judge then went on to deal at length with the position of Mrs. Newstead pursuant to s. 21(2). There is nothing in the trial judge's instructions which suggest that aiding and abetting in the underlying offence is sufficient to render Mrs. Newstead guilty of murder. It was made plain to the jury that the acts of aiding and abetting must relate to the murder. It would be impossible for the jury to understand the instructions in any other way in view of the following detailed instructions dealing with Newstead's position premised upon her involvement in the carrying out of the robbery and/or unlawful confinement.