The Issue

[1]  Only one issue was argued in this appeal.  It relates to the standard of causation which must be proved beyond a reasonable doubt in order to support a conviction of second degree murder.

[2]  In the case of manslaughter the standard of causation is that the act of the accused must be a contributing cause of the death of the victim, greater than de minimis (see Smithers v. The Queen, 1977 CanLII 7 (SCC), [1978] 1 S.C.R. 506.)  In the case of first degree murder where the death occurs while the accused is committing one of the domination offences listed in s-s.231(5), the standard of causation is that the act of the accused must be an essential, substantial and integral part of the killing of the victim.(see R. v. Harbottle, 1993 CanLII 71 (SCC), [1993] 3 S.C.R. 306 where the standard is sometimes described as substantial cause.)

[3]  Mr. Justice Wilkinson’s charge to the jury in this case described the relevant standard of causation for second degree murder and for manslaughter as being a contributing cause greater than a merely trivial or insignificant cause, and the relevant standard for first degree murder committed in the course of forcible confinement as being a substantial cause.

[4]  The accused was convicted of second degree murder.

[5]  Counsel for the appellant argued that the standard of causation that is required to be proved beyond a reasonable doubt before there can be a conviction of second degree murder is the standard of a substantial cause, and not the standard of a contributing cause beyond the insignificant or trivial.  Counsel said that there should be a single standard of causation for all offences which constitute murder, and that the standard of causation for murder should be more strict than the standard which applies to manslaughter.  In short, he said that the Harbottle standard and not the Smithers standard should apply to second degree murder.  He noted that this issue has not yet been squarely decided by the Supreme Court of Canada.  He said that having regard to the charge to the jury in this case the Court should order a new trial on a charge of second degree murder.

 