ANALYSIS

[85]      Saleh does not argue that allowing the jury to consider the scenario in which he fired one of the fatal shots resulted in procedural unfairness, nor does he take issue with the proposition that a trial judge has a duty to instruct the jury on all routes to liability that arise from the evidence, even if the Crown chooses not to rely on a particular route: R. v. Pickton, 2010 SCC 32, [2010] 2 S.C.R. 198, at paras. 19 and 27; R. v. Farrant, 1983 CanLII 118 (SCC), [1983] 1 S.C.R. 124, at p. 139.[2]

[86]      Instead, the essence of Saleh’s argument is that the evidence of Yegin and the testimony of the pathologist are irreconcilable, leaving no air of reality to a “Saleh-as-fatal-shooter” route to culpability as a co-principal who actually committed the offence of murder: R. v. Largie, 2010 ONCA 548, 101 O.R. (3d) 561, at para. 141, leave to appeal refused, [2011] S.C.C.A. No. 119.

[87]      I am not persuaded by this argument. The evidence of the pathologist was that: (i) there were two fatal wounds, one to the upper-left chest that resulted from a shot “from a close distance” as there was some soot staining in the wound, and one to the right-upper abdomen shot from further away as there was no soot staining; and (ii) there was no bullet injury to Hassan’s head.

[88]      During his testimony, Yegin drew a sketch of his recollection of where Saleh and Esrabian were standing relative to Hassan at the time of the shooting: see Appendix A to these reasons. As the trial judge noted, on that evidence Esrabian was not close enough to fire a shot “from a close distance” – “inches” – that would cause the upper chest wound. Saleh was. On Yegin’s evidence, one person – Saleh – was close enough to cause the upper chest wound, while another – Esrabian – was far enough away to cause the wound to the abdomen that lacked any soot stain. Viewed in that way, the evidence of Yegin and the pathologist was not mutually exclusive, and the scenario of Saleh-as-fatal-shooter was supported by some evidence and not speculative.

[89]      Saleh contends, however, that such a scenario cannot account for Yegin’s evidence that Saleh shot Hassan in the head, not the upper left chest. The evidence the jury heard from Yegin regarding what he saw Saleh do was that: (i) “I remember a gun pointed right at his head”; (ii) “I seen him shoot the gun. I seen blood splatter over his head. So my limited knowledge of that, he was shot in the head”; (iii) “I just seen blood splatter all over”; (iv) “Did I see the bullet go in the head? I did not see it, but I – I knew that the bullet went to his head, because there’s blood splatter.” In sum, Yegin testified that he saw Saleh point a gun at Hassan’s head, shoot it, and while he did not see a bullet go into Hassan’s skull, from the blood splatter that he did see Yegin concluded the bullet must have gone into Hassan’s head.

[90]      Based on her view of the evidence as a whole, the trial judge explained to counsel why she would leave the “Saleh-as-fatal-shooter” scenario for the jury’s consideration:

I mean I may see things differently than Counsel do, but I think it is at least possible, based on the evidence, that the jury could accept some of Mr. Yegin’s evidence, or find he’s mistaken on this whole issue of the shot to the head and so on, and so forth, which we know never happened … That he could be mistaken, and that in fact the second shot to the chest was fired by Mr. Saleh. That’s open for them to conclude …

[91]      That assessment of the evidence was open to the trial judge. When taken as a whole, the evidence of the pathologist and the ballistics expert, on the one hand, and that of Yegin, on the other, was not diametrically opposed or mutually exclusive. The trial judge did not invite the jury to speculate. An inference that Saleh fired one of the fatal shots was one that could be reasonably and logically drawn from the group of facts established by the evidence: R. v. Morrissey (1995), 1995 CanLII 3498 (ON CA), 22 O.R. (3d) 514 (C.A.), at p. 530. The trial judge properly left to the jury the task of assessing a mode of participation in which Saleh fired a fatal shot, in light of the jury’s assessment of the credibility of Yegin’s narrative of events.

[92]      Accordingly, I would reject this ground of appeal.