Submissions by the Crown
 

[49] It is the position of the Crown that the accused person should be ordered to stand trial for the first degree murder of the two deceased parties, Donovan Samuda and Howard Deacon, on the basis that although Mr. Forbes planned and deliberated to murder his estranged common law wife, Lorna Graham, he unlawfully caused the death of these two persons at the Whip Burger restaurant and dance club, which deaths constitute culpable homicide within the meaning of s.229(a) of the Criminal Code. Moreover, due to the concept of “transferred intent”, the murders of Samuda and Deacon are properly classified as first degree murder on the basis of planning and deliberation within the meaning of s.231(2) of the Code, notwithstanding that Mr Forbes did not kill the person he intended to murder, namely, Lorna Graham.

 

[50] The concept of “transferred intent” further applies, it is argued, such that Mr. Forbes should be ordered to stand trial for the attempted murder of Leroy Whittaker (now deceased), Dana (“Jan”) Cumberbatch and Shaun Morgan, even though he did not injure the person he attempted to murder, Ms. Graham. In addition, the Crown submits that committal for trial for the attempted murder of Natasha Roberts is justified on the basis that this complainant was part of a class of persons who could hinder or prevent the defendant’s escape from the Whip Burger, and that Mr. Forbes intended to kill any such persons as he was in the process of fleeing the premises following the shootings.

 

[51] The Crown observes that there is overwhelming evidence of planning and deliberation on the part of Mr. Forbes to kill Lorna Graham, as demonstrated by the events in the weeks and months prior to the shootings at the Whip Burger where the defendant threatened to kill her and even attempted to do so in the vicious stabbing attack in February, 1993. All that was left for Mr. Forbes was to shoot and kill Ms. Graham, which he told her he would do, shortly before the evening of 17 September 1994. His bringing a fully loaded gun and firing it multiple times at this time, it is contended, is powerful evidence of his plan and intention to execute it. Indeed, the shooting of the five persons inside the Whip Burger occurred in the same area of the dance floor where Mr. Forbes last saw Ms. Graham as he tried to force her outside after telling her that he had come for her; the shooting of Natasha Roberts moments afterwards took place a short distance away, as he was in the process of fleeing the club and she was in a position to interfere with his escape.

 

Submissions by the Defence
 

[52] Mr. Bayliss, for the defence, takes the position that there is no basis in law for ordering Dudley Forbes to stand trial for first degree murder, although committal for trial is warranted, he concedes, on two counts of second degree murder. Mr. Bayliss further argues that Mr. Forbes should not be ordered to stand trial on the four counts of attempted murder, although there is sufficient evidence for committal for trial for the lesser offence of aggravated assault.

 

[53] With respect to the first degree murder charges, it is submitted by Mr. Bayliss that while Mr. Forbes may have intended to kill Lorna Graham upon his initial encounter with her at the Whip Burger, the “intervening events” of the scuffle inside the club and his being prevented from removing her from the premises, is indicative of a person who subsequently loses control  and embarks on a “crazed rampage” with tragic consequences for the shooting victims. Mr. Bayliss cautions that the fact Mr. Forbes may have previously threatened Lorna Graham is not conclusive evidence of an intent to plan to kill her. Indeed, had this been his intention, he could have simply just shot her inside the night club. Moreover, it is argued, there is no evidence that Mr. Forbes sought her out when he returned inside while armed with a gun or that he was looking for anyone in particular. The evidence thus supports the inference of the defendant acting in a fury, unfocussed, and firing randomly, due to his being ejected from the premises, and cannot be used as the basis for the Crown’s “transferred intent” theory.  

 

[54] Neither is committal for trial for attempted murder warranted, according to Mr. Bayliss, due to the application of the “transferred intent” doctrine. Not only was the defendant’s original intention, as it related to Lorna Graham, “spent” upon the intervening events inside the premises, there is no basis in law for extending the doctrine of “transferred intention” to the offence of attempted murder, given the difference in wording in s.239 of the Code as opposed to culpable homicide in s.229(b). That is, the definition of murder specifically provides for an offence of murder based upon transferred intention whereas the offence of attempted murder does not. Finally, it is submitted that the offence of attempted murder as it relates to Natasha Roberts is not made out due to the absence of any evidence that Mr. Forbes’ actions permit the drawing of an inference of intention to kill, as opposed to a lack of focus coupled with wild and random shooting, at the time this victim was struck by gunfire. Put shortly, it is not the mere use of a gun that suffices for committal for trial for the offence of attempted murder, but the manner in which it is used.


Application of Facts to Law  

 

[99] In order for the defendant to be committed to stand trial for the first degree murder of the two deceased persons, Samuda and Deacon, the essential hurdle that the Crown must cross in terms of satisfying the Shephard test is that there must be evidence that the murders were planned and deliberate. In order for the defendant to be committed to stand trial for the attempted murder of the four named parties, Whittaker, Cumberbatch, Roberts and Morgan, the essential hurdle that the Crown must cross in terms of satisfying the Shephard test is that there must be evidence that there was a specific intention to kill on the part of the defendant. It is to these discrete issues that I shall now turn.

 

First Degree Murder counts
 

[100] The events that occurred at the Whip Burger on 17 September 1994 must be considered in context. There is evidence for the jury that at such time the defendant bore considerable animus towards his intended victim, Lorna Graham, as indicated by his previous threats to kill her if she did not return home to him with their children, including his attempt to murder her in February, 1993. In the weeks and days preceding the shooting rampage at the Whip Burger, Mr. Forbes told her that he had a gun with which he was walking around, and that he would kill her. He was being sought by the police for the attempted murder of Ms. Graham at this time.

 

[101] As Hill J explained in R v. S.B., [1996] O.J. No. 1187 (QL) (Gen.Div.), in the “relational context”, evidence of “prior aggressive conduct”, including assaultive behaviour which is attributable to the accused, may be of assistance to the trier of fact in identifying an animus of the accused towards the complainant, and thus the relevant state of mind of the accused at the time of the alleged commission of any offences. Such use of narrative evidence in domestic violence cases has been approved of by the Ontario Court of Appeal: see, for example, R v D.S.F. (1999), 1999 CanLII 3704 (ON CA), 43 O.R. (3d) 609, 23 C.R. (5th) 37. 132 C.C.C. (3d) 97 (C.A.); R v Krushel (2000), 2000 CanLII 3780 (ON CA), 130 O.A.C. 160, 31 C.R. (5th) 295, 142 C.C.C. (3d) 1 (C.A.); R v MacDonald, 2002 CanLII 14251 (ON CA), [2002] O.J. No. 4657 (QL), 166 O.A.C. 121, 170 C.C.C. (3d) 46 (C.A.).

 

[102] In the instant case, there is a cogent body of such evidence available to the trier of fact, particularly that the defendant, Dudley Forbes, harboured a great deal of animosity towards his ex-wife, Lorna Graham, at the time of the shootings at the Whip Burger restaurant and club in September, 1994.

 

[103] I am of the respectful opinion that there is substantial evidence available to the jury to find that Mr. Forbes planned and deliberated to kill Ms. Graham at this time. Such items of evidence include the defendant indicating to her shortly before the shootings that he was walking around with a gun so as to kill her; his taking a fully loaded weapon to the Whip Burger at a time when he was keeping his whereabouts unknown from Ms. Graham and the police; telling Ms. Graham that he had come for her when he tried to drag her out of the restaurant; and discharging the weapon several times both to gain entrance back inside the Whip Burger, and in the area of the dance floor where he last saw Ms. Graham shortly after his unsuccessful attempt to remove her from the premises.

 

[104] The theory of the defence that, notwithstanding the defendant’s initial intention to confront Ms. Graham at the Whip Burger, his loss of control and random shooting spree following the “intervening events” of being taken outside by other patrons is inconsistent with planned and deliberate conduct, must inevitably be resolved by the trier of fact and belongs exclusively within its domain. On one view of the evidence, the defendant may be taken to have intended to force Ms. Graham outside and to get into his car where he had a loaded firearm with which to kill her, and she would be away from the protection of others; on another view of the evidence, Mr. Forbes may be considered to have brought the weapon to menace and even assault Ms. Graham while speaking with her in person for the first time in several months, but not to necessarily kill her. The preliminary inquiry, in my view, is not the appropriate forum for resolving this evidentiary issue.

 

[105] Given my holding that there is evidence upon which a reasonable jury, properly instructed, could return a verdict of first degree murder on the basis of planning and deliberation, it remains to observe that it is not strictly necessary to record on what precise basis the jury may reach this conclusion. That is, whether one approaches the question on the basis of transferred intent (Droste) or that the victims belonged to a class of persons whom the defendant planned and deliberated to kill if they were present and tried to prevent the execution of his plan to kill his estranged wife (Dipchand), one arrives at precisely the same conclusion: there is evidence of planning and deliberation with relation to the killing of a specific person. It will be for the jury to consider all the possible alternatives: R v Thatcher, 1987 CanLII 53 (SCC), [1987] 1 S.C.R. 652, 57 C.R. (3d) 97, 32 C.C.C. (3d) 481.     

 

            Attempted Murder Counts

 

[106] With respect to the four counts of attempted murder, it is important to observe at the outset that it is not entirely clear where the victims were located at the time of the shootings, and the order in which they were struck by bullets fired by the defendant’s gun. It appears from the evidence that Whittaker, Cumberbatch and Morgan were shot inside the premises, in the area of the dance floor, whereas Roberts seems to have received her injuries while the defendant was in the process of fleeing and she was exiting the premises. Ms. Roberts related, however, that she saw a man get shot right in front of her at the time, although this is not stated by any other witness in these proceedings.

 

[107] The question remains, however, whether there is evidence upon which a reasonable jury, properly instructed, could find that the defendant formed the specific intention to kill, which is a requisite element of the attempted murder offence. There is no requirement that the defendant must have had the specific intention, though, to murder each of the victims specified in the information. What is required is that the defendant possess the specific intent to kill someone inside and immediately around the Whip Burger premises in the circumstances of this case.

 

[108] The shootings of the four injured parties did occur in reasonable proximity and time to the shootings of the two deceased parties. I have earlier endeavoured to explain my reasons for concluding that there is evidence for the jury to find that these were planned and deliberate murders. With respect to the offence of attempted murder, while there is a certain overlap in the evidence respecting the defendant’s specific intention to kill, I consider particularly germane the following: the defendant threatened to shoot and kill Ms. Graham with a gun shortly before the incident if she did not return home to him with their children; he appeared to have found out that she was at the Whip Burger and took a loaded gun there; after confronting Ms. Graham inside the premises and attempting unsuccessfully to pull her outside; he returned with his gun and fired it so as to gain entry; the defendant went to the area of the dance floor where he last saw Ms. Graham and discharged his gun in that area several times; and he fired the weapon as well as he was in the process of leaving so as to make good his escape.

 

[109] I do not think it can be said that on the basis of such evidence it would not be open to the trier of fact to find that the defendant formed the specific intention to kill at the time in question. While the fact of firing a gun is one of the circumstances to consider and not all gunshots may provide evidence of intent to kill, as noted by Campbell J. in R v Ranjanayagam, supra, it is noteworthy that the weapon was discharged numerous times in close proximity to the area where the defendant last saw Ms. Graham, whom he had previously threatened to shoot, and occurred moments after he told her that he had come for her. The fact that the defendant may have been angry with other persons at the same time, on account of their removing him from the premises, does not detract from these factual items and must inevitably be matters which go to the weight of the evidence.  It follows, in my view, that there is sufficient evidence upon which the jury could find that the defendant had the specific intention to kill at the requisite time.

 

[110] As is the case in respect of the first degree murder counts, it is not strictly necessary to record on what precise basis the jury may reach this conclusion. That is, whether one approaches the question on the basis of transferred intent (Droste; Deakin) or that the victims were in the general area of that portion of the premises to which the defendant directed his gunfire at the intended target (Marshall; Edwards; Vaz), one arrives at precisely the same conclusion: there is sufficient evidence from all the circumstances by which the jury could conclude that the defendant had the requisite mens rea to kill the injured parties, notwithstanding they were not specifically named targets of Mr. Forbes. It will be for the jury to consider all the possible alternatives: R v Thatcher, supra.  

 

Conclusion
 

[111] I conclude, having considered the matter with the benefit of counsels’ written materials and oral submissions, and upon further review of the evidence taken at this preliminary inquiry, that there is evidence upon which a reasonable jury, properly instructed, could return verdicts of two counts of first degree murder and four counts of attempted murder, on the information before the court.

 

[112] Some final comments are in order. Throughout the course of more than four weeks of hearing evidence and legal argument, the conduct of counsel has been exemplary. I wish to record my appreciation of the very high degree of professionalism, courtesy and personal understanding which counsel have displayed, without exception, to each other, and through each other to the court. The quality of their written materials and concise oral submissions has been outstanding. The administration of justice has been well served in this case through their efforts and obvious dedication.

 