DECISION
          The ultimate result of the trial judge's errors was the imposition of a sentence which, because of its excessive

[Page 10]

leniency, fails to live up to its fundamental purpose, namely a contribution to respect for the law and the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society, and fails to respect the objectives of sentencing set out in sections 718(a), (b), (c) and (f), and s. 718.1 of the Code. Finally, and perhaps more importantly, it is not, contrary to s. 718.1, proportionate to the gravity of the offence. As a result of the foregoing, this Court must vary the sentence within the limits prescribed by s. 272(2)(b), and impose a fit sentence.

          Appellate courts have upheld lengthy terms of imprisonment for egregious violations of s. 272(1) (c) of the Code. They have done so, at least in part, because of the belief that respect for the law will be diminished if courts fail to express by an appropriately severe sanction society's abhorrence and lack of tolerance for the abuse of defenceless victims. In Regina v. Murray (1987), 1986 CanLII 4710 (NS CA), 31 C.C.C. (3d) 323 (N.S.S.C.(A.D.)), the Court upheld a sentence of imprisonment of 57 months even though the 23 year old offender's criminal record was minor. In R. v. Ivan (G.J.), supra, this Court refused to grant leave to appeal a sentence of six and one half year's imprisonment for sexual assault, even though Mr. Ivan pled guilty and his conviction was for sexual assault simpliciter, a hybrid offence under s. 271(1) which carries a maximum punishment of ten years when prosecuted by indictment.

          Mr. Johnston's criminal record and the horrific nature of this crime call for a lengthy term of imprisonment. In my view, a term of imprisonment of six years is a fit sentence. Were it not for the mitigating factors which include the significant pre-trial custody, the potential for rehabilitation and Mr. Johnston's demonstrated willingness to seek assistance in combating his drug and alcohol abuse, an even more severe punishment would have been warranted.

[Page 11]

DISPOSITION
          I would allow the appeal, and vary the sentence imposed below by increasing the term of imprisonment to six years.