It is not disputed by counsel that this section can apply in situations where murders are committed concurrent to each other.  At the same time, most of the cases where consecutive sentences have been imposed were cases with joint recommendations that ultimately were endorsed by the sentencing judge.  Most also involved accused initially charged with at least one count of first degree murder whose charges were then reduced as part of the plea deal.

[7]            The Crown provided a number of cases where consecutive periods of parole ineligibility were imposed.  These include:

1.      R. v. Baumgartner, 2013 ABQB 761, [2013] A.J. No. 1497 (QL) – In this case the accused pled guilty to one count of first degree murder, two counts of second degree murder and one count of attempted murder in a cold-blooded execution of security guards who had been his co-workers.  The trial judge accepted counsel's joint recommendation for life imprisonment with parole ineligibility for 25 years on the count of first degree murder, 15 years parole ineligibility consecutive on one count of second degree murder and 15 and 10-year periods of parole ineligibility on the remaining charges to be served concurrently, for a total of 40 years parole ineligibility.

2.      R. v. Bourque, 2014 NBQB 237, [2014] N.B.J. No. 295 (QL) – The accused ambushed five members of the RCMP, killing three and wounding two.  He pled guilty to three counts of first degree murder and two counts of attempted murder, and by joint recommendation was sentenced to 75 years parole ineligibility.

3.      R. v. Husbands, [2015] O.J. No. 2673 (ONSC) (QL) – The accused was convicted by a jury of two counts of second degree murder, five counts of aggravated assault, one count of criminal negligence causing bodily harm and one count of intentional discharge of a firearm.  He targeted and executed two people who were fleeing from his assault.  He shot wildly inside a crowded food court.  The five wounded were innocent bystanders and included a teenager who was shot in the head yet somehow survived.  The accused had an extensive criminal record and was on house arrest at the time of the shootings with conditions not to possess weapons.  Ewaschuk J., in this case, imposed two 15-year terms of parole ineligibility on the counts of second degree murder and ordered that they be served consecutively to each other.

4.      R. v. Vuozzo, 2015 PESC 14, [2015] P.E.I.J. No. 17 (QL) – Here the accused pled guilty to one count of second degree murder and one count of first degree murder.  The accused ambushed and murdered two people by shooting them in their home.  They were targeted because they were from the same family as a man who had killed the sister of the accused many years earlier while impaired.  The accused had no prior criminal record, cooperated with police and pled guilty.  The Crown requested 50 years without parole.  Campbell J. sentenced the accused to life with no parole for 25 years for first degree murder and 10 years with no parole consecutive for the second degree murder.

5.      R. v. Ostamas, 2016 MBQB 136, [2016] M.J. No. 197 (QL) – In this case the accused pled guilty to three counts of second degree murder and the sentencing judge accepted a joint recommendation for a life sentence with parole ineligibility to be 25 years on each count consecutive.  This was the maximum allowed by law.  The accused originally had been charged with two counts of first degree murder and one count of second degree murder.  The counts of first degree murder were reduced as part of the plea agreement.  The accused, in completely unrelated incidents, had hunted down and brutally bludgeoned three homeless men to death.  He also had an extensive criminal record for violence.

[8]            The Crown also provided and defence highlighted several cases where concurrent periods of parole ineligibility have been imposed on accused for multiple murders committed since the new amendments.  These include the following:

1.      R. v. Koopmans, 2015 BCSC 2120, [2015] B.C.J. No. 2484 (QL) – The accused shot three people and was convicted after trial of two counts of second degree murder and one count of attempted murder.  The court sentenced the accused to life imprisonment for attempted murder and life with parole ineligibility of 22 years concurrent for each conviction for murder.

2.      R. v. Bains, 2015 BCSC 2145, [2015] B.C.J. No. 2515 (QL) – Here the accused was convicted of one count of manslaughter and two counts of second degree murder.  There was a joint recommendation for 10 years in prison for the charge of manslaughter and concurrent life imprisonment for each count of murder with eligibility for parole after 18 years.  The trial judge accepted the joint recommendation.

