1)         The Relevant Law
a.   The Need for a Sexual Assault
[41]      Section 231(5)(b) of the Criminal Code applies to persons who commit murder while committing or attempting to commit a sexual assault. I will return to the significance of the inclusion of the offence of attempting to commit sexual assault in s. 231(5)(b), but for the moment will focus on the completed offence of sexual assault as the basis for liability under s.231(5)(b). If a first degree murder charge under s.231(5) is based on the alleged commission of the completed crime of sexual assault, a conviction on first degree murder is possible only if the accused committed murder as defined in s. 229(a) and committed a sexual assault. A potential tension arises in that the crime of murder requires the death of the victim, while the crime of sexual assault requires a live victim.

[42]      The former proposition, that a murder requires the death of the victim, is obvious. The latter proposition, that the crime of sexual assault requires a live victim, can be readily demonstrated.

[43]      A sexual assault is, first and foremost, an assault. There must be an intentional application of force to the person of the victim[2] without the victim’s consent: Criminal Code, s. 265(a). Inferentially, the crime of assault requires that the victim be alive at the time of the relevant touching, and capable of withholding consent.

[44]      Moreover, an assault becomes sexual if it is “committed in circumstances of a sexual nature, such that the sexual integrity of the victim is violated”: R. v. Chase, 1987 CanLII 23 (SCC), [1987] 2 S.C.R. 293, at p. 302. It is difficult to speak meaningfully in such possessive terms about the victim’s sexual integrity if the victim is dead.

[45]      The proposition that a sexual assault cannot be committed against a deceased person imposes challenges for the Crown’s general proposition that the order of the crimes – the murder and the sexual assault – is immaterial under s. 231(5)(b). To overcome this challenge the Crown suggested in oral argument that sexual assault has a different meaning for the purposes of s. 231(5)(b) than it does for the offence of sexual assault under s. 271 of the Criminal Code. I do not agree. This argument would be difficult enough if s. 231(5)(b) simply used the phrase “sexual assault”. However, the section refers specifically to s. 271. All of the elements of a s. 271 sexual assault, or an attempted assault, must therefore be present before a first degree murder conviction under s. 231(5)(b) is appropriate. Indeed, according to basic principles, the elements of an offence must all be present at the same time: R. v. Williams, 2003 SCC 41, [2003] 2 S.C.R. 134, at para. 35; R. v. Cooper, 1993 CanLII 147 (SCC), [1993] 1 S.C.R. 146, at p. 157. Just as a sexual assault under s. 271 cannot be initiated against a person who is dead, a first degree murder premised on the offence of sexual assault cannot occur under s. 231(5) if the sexual assault begins after the victim has died.

[46]      It follows that the Crown’s blunt position that the order of the murder and sexual assault do not matter requires refinement.

[47]      Meanwhile, although he softened his position in argument, in his factum Mr. Niemi took the position that since a victim must be alive to be sexually assaulted, “if the [sexual] acts are committed after the murder, there is no underlying sexual assault and no continuing domination”, and hence no first degree murder under s. 231(5)(b). This proposition, as he ultimately recognized, is also too blunt.

[48]      In my view, there are two distinct avenues to a first degree murder conviction under s. 231(5)(b) in cases in which the sexualized conduct occurs after death. First, those acts, although post-mortem, may amount to an attempted sexual assault on the deceased victim. Second, on the facts, the jury may conclude that the sexual assault was underway before the victim died even though the overtly sexual acts occurred after death.

b.   Attempted Sexual Assault
[49]      Under s. 231(5)(b) an attempted sexual assault will suffice as the underlying offence. It is entirely possible to attempt to commit a sexual assault with a corpse, since under s. 24(1) of the Criminal Code, the impossibility of actually committing an attempted offence is no answer.

[50]      To be guilty of an attempted sexual assault, the accused must intend to commit the offence of sexual assault, and must engage in an act that goes beyond preparation and is not too remote from the consummation of the crime: Criminal Code, s. 24. If this happens, s. 231(5)(b) can lead to a first degree murder conviction, even if the victim expires before the sexual activity commences.

[51]      This avenue to a first degree murder conviction is available to the Crown, in my view, where an accused person believes a deceased victim to be alive, or is not certain whether the victim is alive when the sexual activity is initiated. If they know the victim may be alive but nevertheless proceed with the sexual activity, they are attempting a sexual assault.

[52]      The claim that the mens rea for attempted sexual assault can be met where an accused person is not certain whether the victim is alive when the sexual activity is initiated does not incorporate notions of recklessness into the law of attempt, contrary to the leading authority of R. v. Ancio, 1984 CanLII 69 (SCC), [1984] 1 S.C.R. 225. The accused person in such a case is not simply intending to take an unjustified risk that a prohibited consequence may occur. They are intending to sexually degrade their victim, dead or alive. Since they are intending to sexually violate their victim even if alive, they have the requisite mens rea for a sexual assault, which will suffice for an attempted sexual assault if the victim happens to be dead. The precise time of death of the victim is therefore moot for the purposes of s. 231(5)(b) in such a case. Accused persons that intend to sexually violate their victim, dead or alive, will either have sexually assaulted their victim or they will have attempted to do so.

c.   Sexual Assaults Underway when Death Occurs
[53]      The easiest example of an appropriate s. 231(5)(b) first degree murder conviction based on the actual offence of sexual assault where the sexualized conduct commences after death, arises where the accused person initiates the violence that causes death for the purpose of facilitating sexual domination.

[54]      This position is sometimes explained by focusing on the policy implications so powerfully put by Fraser C.J.A. in R. v. Richer (1993), 1993 CanLII 14676 (AB CA), 141 A.R. 116 (C.A.), at para 13, aff’d 1994 CanLII 98 (SCC), [1994] 2 S.C.R. 486, in words that found favour in this court in R. v. Westergard (2004), 2004 CanLII 16356 (ON CA), 70 O.R. (3d) 382 (C.A.), at para. 33, leave to appeal to S.C.C. refused, [2004] S.C.C.A. NO. 521:

I have difficulty with the proposition that a murderer intent on silencing his victim or rendering her compliant for sexual activity should be able to argue that murder in these circumstances is not first degree murder simply because his victim died by his hand before he could complete, or for that matter, begin the sexual assault.

[55]      As sound as this policy is, the legal reason why sexually motivated murders qualify as first degree murder is that where physical force is undertaken for the purpose of facilitating sexual activity, the assault is sexual from the outset.

[56]      This proposition finds support in R. v. Alderton (1985), 1985 CanLII 1955 (ON CA), 49 O.R. (2d) 257 (Ont. C.A.). Mr. Alderton physically attacked the victim in her bed and attempted to bind her hands, but she managed to flee before his physical touching became overtly sexual. On appeal he protested his sexual assault conviction, but Martin J.A. upheld it, saying, at p.263, “[W]e are all satisfied that [sexual assault] includes an assault with the intention of having sexual intercourse with the victim without her consent, or an assault made upon the victim for a sexual purpose.”

[57]      It follows, as Steel J.A. said in R. v. Muchikekwanape, 2002 MBCA 78, 166 Man. R. (2d) 81, at para. 89, that “pre-death violence perpetrated to subdue a victim for the purpose of perpetrating a sexual assault is in itself a sexual assault.”  Even though the sexualized activity does not commence until after death, the sexual assault commences before death, providing the basis for a first degree murder conviction under s. 231 (5)(b).

[58]      In practical terms, the fact that an assault perpetrated for the purpose of facilitating sexual activity can ground a first degree murder conviction under s.231 (5)(b), even where the objectively sexualized assaultive acts have yet to begin, does nothing to extend the reach of s. 231 (5)(b). This is because a  first degree murder conviction under s.231 (5)(b) can be based on an attempted sexual assault, and anyone who uses violence for the purpose of perpetrating a sexual assault has gone beyond preparation and is committing an attempted sexual assault. Still, it is important in understanding the technical scope of s. 231(5)(b), and those authorities that rest first degree murder convictions on sexual assault findings where sexualized conduct occurs after death, to appreciate when the completed offence can provide a path to conviction.

[59]      The instant point, of course, is that where the victim dies at the hands of the accused before the accused commences the sexualized conduct that he intended all along, the fact that it is impossible to sexually assault a corpse will not prevent a s. 231(5)(b) first degree murder conviction. The victim may be dead when the sexualized conduct occurs, but they were alive when the sexual assault commenced.

[60]      Sensibly, the law does not require discrete proof that, before the violence ensued, the accused person had an intention to sexually violate their victim. Where the two crimes – murder and sexual assault – are so “inextricably intertwined that they form a single continuous transaction”, to use the phrase offered by Steel J.A. in Muchikekwanape, at para. 77, the entire attack takes on the character of a sexualized murder and will ground a first degree murder finding under s. 231(5)(b). In effect, the close link between the events exposes, circumstantially, that the murder is a sexual killing. Since the entire single transaction is a sexual killing, a sexual assault is necessarily occurring when the murder happens, even if the victim has expired by the time the objectively sexualized conduct begins.

[61]      This outcome is made possible by the interpretation that has been given to the “while committing” requirement found in s. 231(5). That component of s.  231(5) has been authoritatively interpreted in R. v. Paré, 1987 CanLII 1 (SCC), [1987] 2 S.C.R. 618, in the context of s. 231(5)(b). Even though the most natural reading of s. 231(5) suggests that both offences must occur simultaneously, this is not what the law requires. The two offences can occur sequentially, so long as they are properly characterized as parts of the same transaction or event.

[62]       In coming to this decision in Paré, Wilson J. noted that sexual assault is only one of the underlying offences that can satisfy s. 231(5)(b). Other offences include hijacking, kidnapping and unlawful confinement. What these offences have in common is that they each involve the illegal domination of the victim by the accused. Justice Wilson used this feature to identify an “organizing principle” that would support a purposive and sensible interpretation of the “while committing” requirement, at p. 633:

This principle is that where a murder is committed by someone already abusing his power by illegally dominating another, the murder should be treated as an exceptionally serious crime. Parliament has chosen to treat these murders as murders in the first degree.

[63]      To achieve this organizing principle, the Supreme Court adopted the “single transaction” test recognized by Martin J.A. in R. v. Stevens (1984), 1984 CanLII 3481 (ON CA), 11 C.C.C. (3d) 518 (Ont. C.A.): Paré, at p. 632. If the underlying offence and the killing “all form part of one continuous sequence of events forming a single transaction” then the “while committing” requirement is satisfied: Paré, at p. 632, citing Stevens, at p. 541. Accordingly, Wilson J. explained, at para. 629:

[T]he words “while committing” do not require an exact coincidence of the murder with the underlying offence. Rather, they require a close temporal and causative link between the two.

[64]      In R. v. Pritchard, 2008 SCC 59, [2008] 3 S.C.R. 195, at para. 35, Binnie J., writing for the court, paid regard to the underlying philosophy of s. 231(5) when providing guidance on how the temporal and causative link is to be applied:

The temporal-causal connection is established where the [underlying offence] creates a “continuing illegal domination of the victim” that provides the accused with a position of power which he or she chooses to exploit to murder the victim.

[65]      It was therefore settled after Paré that the “single transaction” test can be met where the actus reus of the underlying offence is either ongoing or completed when the murder occurs. Mr. Paré had finished sexually assaulting his seven-year old victim when he decided he had to kill the boy to escape detection. The sexual assault and the killing where linked temporally and casually, since the two acts occurred close in time and the sexual assault gave rise to the killing: Paré, at p. 634.

[66]      There has been modest controversy, however, about whether this can work in reverse. Can a first degree murder conviction occur where the sexualized conduct commences after the victim has died? The case most commonly cited in opposition to that possibility is R. v. Quesnel (1991), 1991 CanLII 11938 (MB CA), 71 Man. R. (2d) 1 (C.A.).[3]  This case has been offered to support the proposition that if the sexualized conduct commences after the victim has died, s. 231(5) is not available. Yet as the illustration of the sexually motivated killing demonstrates, there are s. 231(5)(b) cases where the murderous act can precede the sexualized acts. I therefore agree with the court in R. v. Squires, 2005 NLCA 51, 249 Nfld. & P.E.I.C. 14, at para. 57, leave to appeal to S.C.C. refused, [2005] S.C.C.A. No. 561, that “[i]t would be incorrect in law to instruct the jury on the basis that death of the victim before commission of the acts said to constitute the sexual assault precludes application of s. 231(5)(b)” (citations omitted).  

[67]      The prevailing body of law commonly interprets s. 231(5)(b) as supporting first degree murder convictions in cases where death precedes the sexual activity, provided the sexual assault and murder are part of one continuous sequence of events forming a single transaction: R. v. Mullings, 2014 ONCA 895, 319 C.C.C. (3d) 1, at para. 102, leave to appeal to S.C.C. refused, [2015] S.C.C.A. No. 253; Westergard, at paras. 31-35; R. v. Ganton (1992), 1992 CanLII 8246 (SK CA), 105 Sask. R. 126 (C.A.).[4] Other similar authorities include Richer, Muchikekwanape, Squires, R. v. Fliss, 2000 BCCA 347, 145 C.C.C. (3d) 353, and R. v. Plewes, 2000 BCCA 278, 137 B.C.A.C. 13, aff’d on other grounds, 2002 SCC 16, [2002] 1 S.C.R. 535.

[68]      If the two crimes are so “inextricably intertwined that they form a single, continuous transaction”, the requisite connections called for under the “while committing” requirement exist: Muchikekwanape, at para. 77. The “temporal connection” is obvious and the required “causal connection” is generally supplied by the fact that death was caused during what can fairly be seen, in all of the circumstances, as a single transaction, to wit, a sexual killing.

[69]      Where the murder and sexual assault are sufficiently intertwined to constitute a single transaction, the underlying principle of s. 231(5)(b) is also clearly honoured. As Fraser C.J.A. put it in Richer, at para. 14:

[W]hen the required linkage is found to exist, it is the two crimes – sexual assault and murder – committed together, regardless of the order, which represents the ultimate exploitation of the position of power over a victim.

[70]      In saying this I understand that, in the factual context of Pritchard, Binnie J. referred, at para. 35, to a “‘continuing illegal domination of the victim’ that provides the accused with a position of power which he or she chooses to exploit to murder the victim.” This formula does appear to connote that the domination from the underlying crime must distinctly come first in time. Justice Binnie was not adjudicating a case where the order of crimes was an issue, however, and cannot fairly be taken to be directing that there is a mandated sequence for the forms of domination that occur within the “continuing illegal domination of the victim” he describes.

[71]      In R. v. Russell, 2001 SCC 53, [2001] 2 S.C.R. 804, at para. 42, another case were the order of crimes was not in issue, McLachlin C.J., articulated the rational in more flexible terms:

The essence of the reasoning [in Paré] was that s. 231(5)(b) reflects Parliament’s determination that murders committed in connection with crimes of domination are particularly blameworthy and deserving of more severe punishment. In many cases, such murders will be committed as the culmination of the accused’s domination of the victim of the enumerated offence. This was the case in Paré, Arkell and Luxton. In other cases, however, the accused will have murdered one person in connection with the domination of another. I cannot conclude that Wilson J.'s judgment in Paré or Lamer C.J.'s judgments in Arkell or Luxton foreclose the application of s. 231(5)(b) in such cases.

[72]      In spite of the language that is occasionally used, I do not understand the single transaction decisions to hold that s. 231(5)(b) is always met where the accused commits a murder followed by sexual acts. As has been recognized in this very body of law, if the sexual activity follows a murder in the absence of the requisite temporal and causal connection between the murder and the sexual activity, an indignity to a human body will have occurred rather than a sexual assault, and a s. 231(5)(b) conviction cannot follow: Richer, at para. 9,10; Muchikekwanape, at paras. 77, 88.  As a result, if there is a reasonable doubt about whether the sexualized activity was a new initiative arising after death, s. 231(5)(b) will not apply.

[73]      Unqualified statements found in this body of case law that are capable of suggesting that it does not matter the order in which the two offences occur should therefore not be read to mean that the order of offences never matters. These passages, understood in context, simply communicate that where the killing and sexual activity are so inextricably intertwined that they form a single continuous transaction, the order does not matter.

[74]      With this foundation, the two questions that Mr. Niemi’s contentions raise about the reach of liability under s. 231 (5)(b) can be answered.

[75]      In response to the first question, “Can one commit a sexual assault on a dead person,” the answer is “no.” One cannot commit a sexual assault on a dead person.

[76]      In response to the second question, “If death precedes the sexual assault, when, if ever, can it be said that the death was caused while the accused was committing a sexual assault?”, the answer is more nuanced. If the actions prior to the victim’s death do not amount to a sexual assault as defined in s. 271 the answer is “never.”