The governing principles:

[22]      Under s. 745(c) of the Criminal Code, on conviction for second degree murder the offender must be sentenced to life imprisonment, with no eligibility for parole for a fixed period ranging from a minimum of 10 to a maximum of 25 years.

[23]      Section 745.4 empowers the sentencing judge to increase the general parole ineligibility period from the minimum of 10 years to the period that the judge deems fit, up to the maximum of 25 years.  Section 745.4 requires that in exercising his or her discretion, the trial judge have regard to the character of the offender, the nature of the offence and the circumstances surrounding its commission, and the recommendation of the jury.

[24]      In R. v. Shropshire, 1995 CanLII 47 (SCC), [1995] 4 S.C.R. 227, the Supreme Court of Canada articulated the standard to be applied in assessing the exercise of a trial judge's discretion under s. 744 [now s. 745.4] as follows:

... as a general rule, the period of parole ineligibility shall be for 10 years but this can be ousted by a determination of the trial judge that, according to the criteria enumerated in s. 744, the offender should wait a longer period before having his suitable to be released into the general public assessed. To this end an extension of the period of parole ineligibility would not be unusual, although it may well be that, in the median number of cases, a period of 10 years might still be awarded.

[25]      As well, the Supreme Court held that the power to extend the period of parole ineligibility need not be sparingly used and is not restricted to "unusual circumstances."  The court recognized that "in permitting a sliding scale of parole ineligibility, Parliament intended to recognize that within the category of second degree murder there will be a broad range of seriousness reflecting varying degrees of moral culpability”: at pp. 242-243.

[26]      One of the former leading authoritative appellate cases in Ontario addressing the period of parole ineligibility for second degree murder in a domestic context is that of R. v. McKnight (1999), 1999 CanLII 3717 (ON CA), 44 O.R. (3d) 263.

[27]      In that case, the offender murdered his wife of 20 years by stabbing her to death in their bedroom with a serrated bread knife. The victim sustained numerous injuries and had over 50 defensive wounds. There were elements of planning and deliberation. The jury rejected a defence of not criminally responsible by reason of mental disorder and convicted on second degree murder.

[28]      In McKnight, there were some mitigating circumstances that do not apply to Mr. Suarez-Noa.  Mr. McKnight was deeply and genuinely remorseful about the murder. He was 53 years old and had been a solid contributing member of society. He was found to have a positive potential for rehabilitation. The Crown's expert conceded that but for Mr. McKnight’s serious depression, he likely would not have killed his wife. There was no post-offence conduct.

[29]      The trial judge in McKnight fixed the period of parole ineligibility at 17 years. The Court of Appeal was concerned that with a 17 year ineligibility date, the offender would be 69 years old before he would be released.  In reducing the period of parole ineligibility to 14 years, Laskin J.A. held:

Taking into account all of these aggravating and mitigating features, in my opinion, a 17-year period of parole ineligibility falls outside a reasonable range. No two cases are the same but similar cases from this province of brutal second-degree murders of an unarmed wife or girlfriend suggest a range of 12 to 15 years.

[30]      The decision in McKnight confirms that both denunciation and rehabilitation are relevant factors in fixing the period of parole ineligibility.  Elements of planning and deliberation can be considered as an aggravating feature of second degree murder. See also R. v. Armstrong 1995 CanLII 1570 (ON CA), [1995] O.J. No. 535 (C.A.) at para 21.

[31]      The Court of Appeal in McKnight confirms that no two cases are the same and reiterated the oft-quoted principle that sentencing is an individualized process.

[32]      In the more recent case of R. v. Czibulka, 2011 ONCA 82, 267 C.C.C. (3d) 276, at para. 67, the Court of Appeal considered McKnight and opined that the range of 12 to 15 years for second degree murder of a domestic partner is not cast in stone for all violent spousal or domestic murders. A part of the exercise to determine parole ineligibility requires consideration of the availability or lack of mitigating factors. The court went on to opine that the ceiling for the range of sentence of parole ineligibility has increased to 17 years. The Court of Appeal did not disturb the trial judge’s conclusion of a period of 15 years of parole ineligibility.

[33]      Both counsel have referred to a number of authorities setting out parole ineligibility findings in cases of second degree murder involving domestic violence.  While I do not intend to reference all of them, I tend to agree with the Crown attorney that some of the cases presented in support of the defence position on parole ineligibility are somewhat dated and may not reflect current social values and sentencing principles towards domestic violence murders. I have also considered a number of other reported cases.

[34]      In R. v. Morrow, [1995] O.J. No. 4052, McLean J. imposed a period of parole ineligibility of 15 years on a conviction for second degree murder. The jury had recommended 20 years parole ineligibility. The accused murdered his common-law spouse by cutting her throat following an argument.  The accused had a criminal record.  The court found the commission of the murder in the presence of his two-and-a-half year old child to be particularly aggravating.

[35]      In R. v. McLeod, (2003), 2003 CanLII 4393 (ON CA), 177 O.A.C. 385, [2003] O.J. No. 3923, the Court of Appeal increased the period of parole ineligibility from 10 years to 12 years following a conviction of second degree murder. The accused had stabbed his girlfriend four times in the neck, then cut up her body and deposited it in a suitcase by the highway. The court considered the callous treatment of the victim's body.

[36]      In R. v. Kailayapillai, [2009] O.J. No. 1145, Fuerst J. imposed a period of parole ineligibility of 14 years. The court observed the accused to be in a position of trust to the victim and that she was killed in her own home.   The wife's skull was fractured and she was hung up in the garage and was discovered by her children.  The injuries were horrific. There were some elements of planning.  The accused had no criminal record or prior history of domestic violence.

[37]      In R. v. Moo, 2004 CarswellOnt 3432, aff’d. 2009 ONCA 645, the trial judge sentenced the offender to a period of parole ineligibility of 12 years. In that case, Moo beat his wife with a mortar. He called 911 immediately after the attack, and admitted to the dispatcher “I tried to kill my wife now.” There were prior domestic incidents or situations. The offender had no criminal record, was described as a young man and had gainful employment, similar to Mr. Suarez-Noa’s situation. The trial judge accepted the McKnight range of parole ineligibility. The Court of Appeal was not called upon to review the sentencing decision.

[38]      In R. v. Bonder, 2005 CarswellOnt 7077, Wein J. sentenced the offender to the minimum parole ineligibility period of 10 years. The Crown attorney sought a period of 12 years. In this case there was a single stabbing of his wife while asleep. There was a long history of domestic dysfunction in the family. There had been marital affairs by both Mr. and Mrs. Bonder. There was one prior incident where the deceased had scratched the offender and was subjected to a peace bond. The offender had no criminal record and had been subject to depression and stress. The trial judge found that the offender demonstrated remorse. He had the full support of his children.

[39]      In R. v. Teske, (2005), 2005 CanLII 31847 (ON CA), 202 O.A.C. 239, [2005] O.J. No 3759, the Court of Appeal reviewed the sentence imposed by the trial judge.  The appellant was 41 years of age at the time of his conviction. He did not have a criminal record, but had received a conditional discharge for assaulting his wife.  He killed his wife in their home, and the trial judge imposed a period of parole ineligibility of 16 years, emphasizing the accused’s elaborate efforts to cover up his crime as an aggravating factor.

[40]      The Court of Appeal held that the record offered no reason to depart from the range described in McKnight.  While the Crown did not contend that the appellant set out to kill his wife, the appellant's prior domestic assault and his after-the-fact conduct were significantly aggravating features. The appeal court reduced the parole ineligibility from 16 to 13 years premised on the dearth of supporting reasons to elevate the period beyond the range proffered in McKnight.

[41]      In R. v. Wristen (1999), 1999 CanLII 3824 (ON CA), 47 O.R. (3d) 66, [1999] O.J. No. 4589, the Court of Appeal endorsed the trial judge’s imposition of a period of parole ineligibility of 17 years. The trial judge took into account many factors including that it was a spousal murder, the appellant's failure to disclose the location of the body and the jury recommendations ranging from 14 to 20 years.  The appellant had a criminal record but his only conviction for a crime of violence was the assault on his wife.  He was on probation when he killed his wife. After killing his wife, he demeaned her character to others.  Her body was never found and the offender also tried to conceal her death, going as far as conscripting his daughter to assist him in the cover-up.
