[1] Drapeau, J.A.: Simon Allain appeals his conviction by Mr. Justice Angers of the Court of Queen's Bench on a charge of production of cannabis (marihuana), an act prohibited by s. 7(1) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, S.C. 1996, c. 19. The principal issue at trial was the admissibility of evidence obtained by police upon the execution of a search warrant issued under the authority of s. 11(1) of the Act. [2] The search warrant authorized peace officers to search a residence at 59, 22"d St. in Edmundston, N.B. for cannabis (marihuana) plants, cannabis (marihuana) and paraphernalia associated with the production of cannabis (marihuana). The search resulted in the seizure of 1,456 plants of cannabis (marihuana) which were being cultivated in the basement of the targeted residence. [3] Mr. Allain submits that the trial judge erred in admitting the evidence, because it was obtained as a result of an unreasonable search within the meaning of s. 8 of the Charter. The search is said to be unreasonable because it was made under the authority of a search warrant which was not lawfully issued, there being no reasonable grounds disclosed in the supporting Information from which the issuing judge could be satisfied that the things to be searched for were at the residence rented by Mr. Allain at 59, 22"d St. Mr. Allain seeks the exclusion of the evidence seized pursuant to s. 24(2) of the Charter and an acquittal, since, without the impugned evidence, there is no evidence to support his conviction. [41 Sgt. Réjean Michaud's Information was sworn on June 4, 1997. Sgt. Michaud swore that he had reasonable grounds to believe and that he did believe that the things to be searched for were at 59, 22"d St. in Ed-mundston, N.B. He also swore that those reasonable grounds were as set out in his Information. [51 The Information was drafted in the French language. The following faithfully translates the salient parts of the original text, as they were written, without embellishment or corrections: (Translation) 11] that on May 28, 1997, a source made a call to the office of Crime Stoppers and then called Sergeant Daniel Doucette to inform him that the source had just made a call to the office of Crime Stoppers and believed that the information must be given quickly to the police and that is the reason for the call. That two individuals who resided at 1043 Victoria Street in Edmundston had 2,500 plants of marihuana. The individuals had said that the plants had three weeks to go before maturity. The source had told Sergeant Doucette of having seen the plants and that they were approximately three feet high. The owner of the house had become aware of the cultivation. The two individuals (tenants) had been given 24 hours to leave the premises, otherwise the police would be called. The source mentions a brown jeep, full of mud and the forward plate is bent so that it cannot be read.

"[2] that during one night in May 1997, many jeeps had helped the two individuals from 1043 Victoria to move the plantation of marihuana to one or more locations, unknown at that time. As well, the brown jeep was one of the jeeps used in the move of the plantation. "[3] that 1043 Victoria St. in Edmundston had been rented in February 1996 to two fellows, Paul Leger and Pascal Dubé. "[4] that the brown jeep full of mud, was identified, through surveillance by Sgt. Réjean Michaud as the jeep belonging to Paul Rice. Sgt. Michaud had identified Robert the son at the residence at 59, 22nd St. in Edmundston. Robert Rice well known by police officers as a drug user. "[5] that on May 26, 1997, a woman called the police spoke to constable Mike Michaud regarding unusual things which were taking place at 59, 22nd St. in Ed-mundston. She knows one of the guys who goes there and since his attitude has changed for the worse. She has seen them entering 59, 22"d St. in Edmundston with picks and shovels and believes that narcotics would be sold. "[6] that 59, 22"d St. belongs to Maurice Couturier, rented to Simon Allain. "[7] that Sgt. Rejean Michaud conducted physical surveillance and observed a frequent presence of Paul Rice's jeep at 59, 22nd St. "[8] that the informant believes that the information is true and that the 2,500

plants of marihuana have been placed in more than one location because of the fact that it is now known that the owner of 1043 Victoria St. in Edmundston had discovered the existence of the marihuana plants and eventually the police would also learn of its existence. "[9] that a physical surveillance conducted by Sergeant Réjean Michaud on June 04, 1997 shows the known presence of persons who traffic in narcotics (Robert Rice, Philippe Soucy ...) And noticed a lot of coming and going. "[10] that on June 04, 1997, a warrant was obtained to acquire information concerning electrical consumption for 59, 22"d St. in Edmundston to see if there is an obvious demonstration of activities relating to consumption which could provide important evidence. We know that inside cultivation requires a lot of heat and often the heat comes from an electrical system. "[11] that the electrical billing for 59, 22"d St. in Edmundston shows that for a three week period, end of April beginning of May 1997, the electrical consumption doubled compared to a similar period in 1996. As well the bill is double compared to the winter months of 1997. Showing an over-consumption of electricity beginning in April-May 1997. "[12] that for the period from May 6 to June 4, 1997, the consumption is 173.70 compared to the same period last year which was 54.00."