

Randall Kevin Johnston was convicted by a jury of causing bodily harm to K.C. while he sexually assaulted her, an act prohibited by s. 272(1) (c) of the Criminal Code of Canada. Mr. Johnston and K.C. had been living together, as man and wife, for approximately three months when Mr. Johnston brutalized her on July 1, 1997. The crime involved a prolonged and vicious sexual assault which included acts of cruelty and sadism rarely featured in cases before the courts of this Province or, for that matter, elsewhere in this country. During co-habitation, Mr. Johnston and K.C. engaged in sexual relations which featured "rough" sex and physical bondage of K.C. On July 1, 1997 Mr. Johnston crossed the line of demarcation between deviant sex and criminal assault.

          Section 272(2)(b) of the Code provides that the maximum punishment for an offence under s. 272(1)(c) is imprisonment for a term not exceeding 14 years. The presiding judge sentenced Mr. Johnston to imprisonment for a term of 36 months. The Crown seeks leave to appeal and an increase in the term of imprisonment. I would grant leave to appeal.

THE BACKGROUND
          The trial judge refrained from detailing the more depraved and disgusting acts which Mr. Johnston performed, or which he forced K.C. to perform. I see no useful purpose in doing otherwise. The following excerpt from the trial judge's reasons for sentence provides some insight into the crime:

... he shoved her against the wall with his hands. He tied her hands behind her back, and tied her feet, and he decided to be forceful with her. He took some objects, like a pepperoni stick, and stuck them inside her. He was barking orders at her. He called her whore, ditch pig, slut. He had a paint stick with which he slapped her face. Afterwards he took heated curling irons and stuck them in both ends. He

[Page 2]

had nylons around her mouth. She could not get free. She tried to get an air passage. These are her words: "It hurt." She said, "Something burning is going to hurt." He kept shoving nylons further down, choking and pushing his thumbs in. He also used a novelty back scratcher.

According to the victim, the assault took approximately one hour. Afterwards, he cut the nylon off with a knife. He noticed that there was something on the curling iron, which I believe she referred to as "shit", and it was referred to as "faecal material". She went to the shower. She said he came in and he urinated on her face. She felt awful and dirty.

          Additionally, and most significantly, the assault included non-consensual sexual intercourse.

          As a result, K.C. was required to attend the Dr. Everett Chalmers Hospital. The examining physician observed multiple soft tissue bruising over K.C.'s entire body including the area of the mouth as well as over the left eye, the left cheek, the chin, the front of the neck, the upper inner aspects of the arms and buttocks, the wrists and inner thighs, including the upper inner thigh at the external genitalia area. Not surprisingly, there were second degree burns close to the opening of the vagina.

          As well, K.C. suffered significant psychological trauma. The trial judge described it as follows:

... Besides the physical injuries the victim in this case has experienced psychological injuries, by her own description, sleeping problems. She says her nerves are more acute. She has visited a psychiatrist. She felt because of the commission of this crime that she had been treated like an animal and she has been traumatized emotionally and feels that it will be difficult for her to form relationships in the future.

[Page 3]

          K.C.'s victim impact statement gives a poignant account of her emotional suffering:

I feel that being a victim of a rape has been very difficult. Just closing my eyes holding back the pain. Being treated as I was something not a person, with emotions. Enduring this has been mostly humiliating and disgusts me. That I couldn't defend myself due to being [bonded] & tied like an animal. ... Being scared looking over my shoulder in case an associate of his might be lurking about. I find I get emotional, agitated, distracted. ... Just normal tasks seem impossible. ... I find that I'm very judgmental of men. ... I should have more peace and tranquillity. Relationships [are] going to take a long time due to circumstances.

          On July 1, 1997, Mr. Johnston was 38 years old. His criminal record included 23 convictions, the majority for violations of the Criminal Code. He had been convicted of trafficking in a narcotic, possession of a narcotic, theft, break and enter and theft, breach of probation, assault causing bodily harm, uttering death threats, possession of an offensive weapon, break and enter with intent and possession of stolen property. Mr. Johnston's first conviction was for trafficking in a narcotic on September 20, 1976. He was 17 years old at the time. His last convictions prior to July 1, 1997 occurred some four years before at which time he was convicted of three offences under s. 354(1)(a) of the Code (possession of stolen property) and sentenced to concurrent terms of 9 months, consecutive to an 18 month jail term imposed a few weeks earlier for an offence under s. 348(1)(a) of the Code (break and enter with intent).

          In the court below, Mr. Johnston relied quite properly on the factors which traditionally form part of a plea for clemency, including his potential for rehabilitation, his valiant efforts at finding a solution to his alcohol and drug abuse and the time spent in pre-trial custody, a period of five months. However, his submission did not rest solely on such considerations. Indeed, Mr. Johnston evoked the sexual abuse he

[Page 4]

endured as a teenager while at the Kingsclear reformatory to argue that he stood before the Court as a victim, just as much as K.C., and that part of the responsibility for his crime should be borne by the courts and the system which, in his view, were instrumental in the occurrence of his abuse 24 years before, an abuse which in turn caused him to commit the crime against K.C.

THE GROUNDS OF APPEAL
          The appellant contends that the trial judge erred in law in imposing a sentence of incarceration of only 36 months, and that such a sentence is manifestly inadequate, having regard to all the circumstances and the nature of the offence. In its oral submission to this Court, the appellant took the position that imprisonment for six years would be a fit sentence.