[2] The facts in this case can be summarized as follows. Mr. Clarke left a pub in River-view Mall around midnight on December 13, 1993, intending to walk to his mother's house, some five minutes away. He experienced stomach pains and turned back to the Mall parking lot where he got into his vehicle. He sat in the driver's seat, started the engine, turned on the lights, undid his belt, reclined his seat and fell asleep. At 3:38 a.m., Constable Bouliane of the RCMP arrived. He noticed that the car motor was running and that the lights were on. He walked over to the vehicle and saw Mr. Clarke's head. He opened the driver's side door, awoke Mr. Clarke, observed symptoms of impairment and read him the breathalyzer demand and right to counsel address. [3] Mr. Clarke was brought to the RCMP detachment. He was afforded the opportunity of contacting his lawyer. He met only with the message from an answering machine. He was tendered a list of duty counsel and invited to call anyone of them since he would not likely be able to reach his own lawyer in the middle of the night, as evidenced by the fact that an answering machine was taking messages at that lawyer's telephone number. Mr. Clarke decided to contact a lawyer on the duty counsel list. After speaking to a lawyer, he agreed to take

the breathalyzer test. The reading was over the prescribed limit. [4] Judge Savoie decided that there had probably been no breach of Mr. Clarke's right to counsel, but that in any case, if such right had been breached, the certificate would still be admissible under s. 24(2) of the Charter because Mr. Clarke had been given an opportunity to contact an alternative lawyer and had availed himself of that opportunity. Judge Savoie then applied R. v. Diotte (1991), 1991 CanLII 2407 (NB CA), 115 N.B.R.(2d) 195; 291 A.P.R. 195; 64 C.C.C.(3d) 209, a decision of this court, and found Mr. Clarke guilty of having the care and control of a motor vehicle while impaired. [5] On appeal before Mr. Justice Creaghan, Mr. Clarke argued that his right to counsel of his choice had been breached because he had not been given sufficient time to contact his own lawyer, and that he was wrongfully found to have been exercising the "care and control" of his vehicle because he had not intended to drive the vehicle, and thus had not created a situation of danger as contemplated by s. 253(b) of the Criminal Code. Creaghan, J., affirmed the decision of the trial judge with regard to the first issue. He then cited R. v. Diotte and said: "... From a reasonable perspective, what is required is taking care and control of a vehicle after the voluntary consumption of alcohol which thereby creates a situation of danger to others. Here, the facts were that the accused had the intention of not using the vehicle. "The evidence is that he did not take care and control of a vehicle; he decided to go

back and get in it because he was sick and it was cold and he wanted a place to sleep. I find no criminal act in his so doing. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed and the conviction and sentence set aside and an acquittal entered. ..." [6] The appellant submits that the Queen's Bench Justice erred in ruling that the trial judge used the wrong test for the mental element involved in the commission of the offence and in requiring, as an ingredient of the offence, a situation of actual danger to others. The respondent cross-appeals on the right to counsel issue. He submits that the trial judge erred in not excluding the evidence of the breathalyzer because his right to counsel of his choice had not been respected.
