The accused and his estranged wife were involved in litigation over the division of their assets, some of which were held in a corporation.  Because of financial difficulties, the accused’s shares were seized and put up for sale.  The wife attended the sale, allegedly intending to buy the shares.  The accused was also present.  The wife suggested that they speak.  She said:  “I told you that I would wipe you out completely” at which time the accused shot his wife six times and killed her with a loaded gun he was carrying in his pocket. At trial the accused, who was charged with first degree murder, testified that he did not intend to kill his wife and did not know what he was doing.  He argued that the verdict should be reduced to manslaughter on the basis of lack of criminal intent or provocation.  The jury found him guilty of manslaughter.  The Court of Appeal upheld the verdict.



Held:  The appeal should be allowed and a new trial ordered on second degree murder.




The trial judge erred in his charge to the jury on the effect of anger on criminal intent and its relationship to manslaughter.  In the context of murder, the defence of provocation does not eliminate the need for proof of intention to kill, but operates as an excuse that has the effect of reducing murder to manslaughter.   Portions of the jury charge in which the trial judge addressed the criminal intent suggested that anger, if sufficiently serious or intense, but not amounting to the defence of provocation, may reduce murder to manslaughter.  It also suggested that such anger could negate the criminal intention for murder.  These connected propositions are not legally correct.  Intense anger alone is insufficient to reduce murder to manslaughter.  Anger can play a role in reducing murder to manslaughter in connection with the defence of provocation when all the requirements of that defence are met.  Anger  is not a stand-alone defence.  The trial judge’s misdirections on the effect of anger in relation to manslaughter left it open to the jury to find the accused guilty of manslaughter, on the basis of the anger felt by the accused, even if they concluded that the conditions required for the defence of provocation were not met.  The trial judge’s initial direction that anger alone might reduce murder to manslaughter was not corrected on the recharge on provocation and it cannot be inferred from the way the trial proceeded that the jury’s verdict of manslaughter was not based on the erroneous initial direction.
