BRIEF SUMMARY OF FACTS

                        Since I have concluded that there must be a new trial, I do not intend to dwell on the facts.  What follows is a bare outline of the various incidents as described by the complainant, the charges arising out of each and a brief review of some of the more pertinent evidence.



Incident 1:  The M...Street Incident (Incest, Threatening Death, Sexual Assault)

                        The complainant stayed overnight at an apartment on M...Street in Gravenhurst occupied by the appellant and his girlfriend, D.L.  The following morning, after D.L. had gone to work, R.R.1 claimed that she was awakened by the appellant and he proceeded to have sexual intercourse with her against her will.  She complied because she was afraid.  When the appellant finished, he told R.R.1 that she was not to say anything.



Incident 2:  The First Reay Road Incident (Incest, Threatening Death, Sexual Assault)

                        The complainant testified that on the day in question, she was driving with the appellant in her father's car.  The appellant drove to a rural area and stopped the car on Reay Road.  He then ordered the complainant into the back seat where he proceeded to have intercourse with her.   He also demanded that she perform fellatio upon him.  Upon completion, the appellant warned R.R.1 that if she told anyone, he would hurt her and other members of her family.



Incident 3: The Second Reay Road Incident (Incest, Threatening Death, Sexual Assault)



                        R.R.1 claimed that she was sexually assaulted again at the Reay Road location.  According to her testimony, the appellant had intercourse with her and may have ejaculated into her vagina.



Incident 4:  The Car Wash Incident (Incest, Threatening Death and Sexual Assault)

                        On this occasion, the complainant testified that the appellant drove her to a car wash located at the end of a dead end street in Gravenhurst.  After backing the car into one of the car wash bays, the appellant ordered her to sit on the trunk of the car.  He then proceeded to fondle her breasts and have sexual intercourse with her.



Incident 5:  The Garbage Room Incident (Incest, Sexual Assault)

                        For a period of time in the Fall of 1989, R.R.1 and the appellant lived at their parents' apartment in Gravenhurst.  On the day in question, according to R.R.1, the appellant said that he had to make a phone call, which required him to leave the apartment since his parents did not have a phone.  He asked R.R.1 to join him, which she did.  Instead of making a phone call, the appellant took R.R.1 to the garbage room of the apartment building and ordered her to lie down on the cement floor.  He then had sexual intercourse with her.  When she and the appellant heard someone coming down the hall, they both got dressed and returned to their parent's apartment.



Incident 6:  The Final Incident (Incest, Anal Intercourse, Threatening Death and Sexual Assault



                        On November 16, 1989, the appellant and R.R.1 were at their parents' apartment in the company of their father, A.R. and R.R.1's boyfriend E.W. The appellant sought permission to borrow his father's car to go to the store and he asked R.R.1 to accompany him.  After purchasing some gas for the car, the complainant testified that the appellant drove to a remote road, stopped the car and ordered her to masturbate and fellate him.  He also engaged in vaginal and anal intercourse with her.  The activity ended when the two heard the sound of an approaching vehicle.



                        The appellant and R.R.1 then drove to a variety store where they were met by A.R. and E.W. It seems that when Mr. A.R. realized that R.R.1 had left the apartment, he became concerned for her well-being and he and E.W. set out to look for her.  I will have more to say about the nature of Mr. A R.'s concern later in these reasons.



THE VARIOUS COMPLAINTS MADE BY R.R.1

                        On the evening of November 16th, R.R.1 disclosed to her friend S.M. that her brother had sexually assaulted her earlier that day.  She stated that the appellant had entered her anally and that she was bleeding profusely.  R.R.1 nonetheless declined Ms. S.M.'s offer to take her to the hospital.



                        Later that night, R.R.1 and S.M. met two of S.M.'sf., R.P. and R.M.  According to R.M., while he and R.R.1 were alone in Ms. S.M.'s truck, R.R.1 complained of abuse at the hands of her brother, although she did not specify the nature of the abuse.  R.M. also testified that at R.R.1's instigation, he and R.R.1 engaged in sexual intercourse in the front seat of the truck.  R.R.1 admitted to meeting with R.M. but denied having intercourse with him.



                        A day or so later, R.R.1 told her boyfriend E.W. about the November 16th incident.  As a result, E.W. joined R.R.1 in Gravenhurst and they attended Dr. Brand's office on November 21st, 1989.  Dr. Brand diagnosed R.R.1 as having a sexually transmitted disease.  His rectal examination of her revealed no visible injuries.



                        One day later, on November 22nd, 1989, R.R.1 was interviewed by the police.  At that time she disclosed only the November 16th incident.  However, approximately one week later, she advised the police of the five earlier incidents.  The appellant was arrested shortly thereafter.



EVIDENCE CONCERNING THE COMPLAINANT

(a)      Limited Intellectual Capacity

                        The evidence revealed that R.R.1's intellectual capacity was somewhat limited.  R.R.1 herself admitted to being a slow learner and conceded that her reading and writing skills were limited.  Cross-examination revealed that R.R.1 did not know her right hand from her left, that she could not remember all of the months of the year and that she could not count past 100.  She also agreed that she had difficulty remembering events in the past.  Anne-Marie Wicksted, an expert in the field of sexual abuse, testified that based upon her several interviews with R.R.1 in December 1989, she believed that R.R.1 functioned at a pre-teen or teenage level emotionally and socially but at an 8 or 9 year old level intellectually.



(b)      False Allegation of Rape

                        R.R.1 admitted to having made a false allegation of rape in 1988.  She stated that one night, when she was attending a party at her boyfriend E.W.'s house, she met a man and the two went outside and engaged in consensual intercourse.  When R.R.1 returned to the party, E.W. was suspicious.  R.R.1 became frightened and claimed that she had been raped.  The police were called, she repeated her story and the man was arrested.  Several days later, R.R.1 attended at the police station and volunteered the truth.  She was charged with public mischief and pleaded guilty to that offence.



THE EXPERT EVIDENCE

                        In addition to commenting on R.R.1's intellectual capacity, Ms. Wicksted also testified about the rape trauma syndrome, including the various stages that victims go through after being raped and the behavioural and emotional patterns exhibited during those stages.  According to Ms. Wicksted, when she interviewed R.R.1 in December 1989, R.R.1 had passed through the initial acute stage and was entering the pseudo-resolution stage, when rape victims often recant due to their desire to forget about the past traumatic event.  Ms. Wicksted also testified about certain common denominators found to exist in cases of intra-family sexual assault and the reasons for late disclosure in such cases.



POSITION OF THE APPELLANT AT TRIAL

                        The appellant testified at trial and denied committing any of the offences.  In support of his position that R.R.1 had falsely accused him, he relied upon her limited intellectual capacity and its effect on the reliability of her testimony; her previous false allegation of rape; significant inconsistencies in her testimony and the lack of confirmatory evidence.



GROUNDS OF APPEAL AGAINST CONVICTION

                        Although the appellant raised additional grounds of appeal, we required Crown counsel to respond to the following grounds:

(1)      That the trial judge erred in admitting opinion evidence from Ms. Wicksted which served only to bolster the complainant's credibility and that he further erred in failing to caution the jury on the limited use to be made of Ms. Wicksted's evidence.

(2)      That the trial judge erred in admitting R.M.'s testimony as evidence of recent complaint and that he further erred in directing the jury that evidence of recent complaint could be used to support the credibility of the complainant.

(3)      That the trial judge erred in failing to provide a special caution to the jury in respect of the complainant's evidence.

(4)      That the trial judge erred in permitting Crown counsel to adduce from the appellant's father his belief that R.R.1 was telling the truth.

(5)      That the trial judge erred in permitting Crown counsel to lead evidence from the appellant's father that he was concerned about R.R.1 being alone with the appellant.

(6)      That the appellant was deprived of his right to a fair trial when Crown counsel exposed the fact that the appellant had previously been convicted of raping his other sister R.R.2
