The only facts before the trial Judge, and before us, are in a
police statement read to the Judge. The statement, which I have
slightly rephrased for clarification, was as follows:
Alexander Thornton, age 19, had been put out of his home by his parents,
had been sleeping in apartment building halls or furnace rooms for two to
three weeks prior to this incident and on the night of January 17 had slept in a
Dartmouth apartment building where his victim Suzanne T., also 19 years old,
resided, although neither apparently knew the other.
At about 8:50 a.m. on Friday, January 18, 1980 Thornton followed Miss T.
to the parking lot near the building where she started to get into her car to go
to school. Thornton confronted her with what looked like a gun and ordered
her into the car. He took the driver's seat, obtained the car keys from her,
started the car and took some money from her handbag.
He drove the car to the Bedford area and stopped at an isolated spot.
Thornton ordered the girl to remove her coat. When she refused he struck her
face with his hand and threatened her with the gun. She then took off her coat
and he felt her breasts. He then told her to straighten her clothes.
Thornton then drove the car around the Halifax-Dartmouth area and
eventually headed toward Truro via highway number 102. They arrived at
Truro at about noon.
Thornton then drove the car, still with the girl in it, around Truro and out
on the back roads east of Truro in the area of Harmony and Camden,
Colchester County. The car became stuck on a back road for two or three
hours. After it was freed, he drove the car back into Truro and bought some
gasoline.
Thornton again drove out into the back roads in the Harmony area and in
the early evening the car became stuck once more. After making some unsuc
cessful attempts to free the car Thornton told Miss T. to take her clothes off.
When she refused he struck her in the face and threatened her. She removed
her clothing and on his orders got into the back seat. Thornton had inter
course with her and then permitted her to get dressed. A short time after this
another vehicle containing several people came along and pulled the car free.
Thornton drove into Truro and bought more gas for the car. He then drove
back to the Harmony area, stopped the car and told Miss T. to get out. He
struck her in the face and tried to strangle her but she wrestled his hands
away. He struck her a few more times and they got back in the car.
According to Miss T. she was once more ordered out of the car and Thornton
thereupon leaned her back over the hood of the - car and tried to strangle her
again. She struggled and got away from him. She claimed that Thornton then
brought the gun from the car, put it to her head and said some words to the
effect that "it would only take one bullet." He then pushed her back into the
car.
They drove back into Truro at approximately 10:00 p.m. and stopped at a
store. Miss T. said that Thornton told her not to get out of the car or he
would find her and kill her. When Thornton went into the store Miss T. got
out of the car, ran to a nearby house and called the police. The first persons
who saw her at this time described her as being extremely frightened.
Thornton then drove to the Dartmouth area, turned around and went back
towards Truro, again on the 102 highway. He was arrested without incident
at an exit from the highway in Truro.
Thornton was cooperative with the police and readily admitted the offences.
He stated that he did not know why he did it. He said that he had thrown the
firearm, which he claimed was an air pistol from the car along the 102
highway. The police were unable to locate the weapon.
We know nothing more of the details of the trip or of the effect
on the young woman of her frightening experience. We know
almost nothing of what happened during the first nine or 10 hours
of the odyssey back and forth, in and around first Halifax and then
Truro. Certainly by early evening the apparently aimless,
wandering journey had become horrifying and dangerous with the
kidnapping developing into rape and then assault and threatened
murder.
Thornton's pre-sentence report, criminal record and psychiatric
report reveal a very mixed-up and maladjusted young man. An
adopted child, brought up in various parts of Canada, he had
continuing difficulties in school with companions, and especially
continuing conflicts with his mother which culminated in her
kicking him out of the family home at Dartmouth a few weeks
before the present crimes.
While in Grade X at Truro, age 16, he came up behind a young
girl and jabbed her with a paring knife for no apparent reason. He
was convicted, March 15, 1977, of possession of a weapon, to wit,
a knife, for a purpose dangerous to the public peace contrary to s.
83 of the Criminal Code. He was sentenced to three years'
probation and was thus still on probation at the time of the
present offence. Pursuant to the probation order he received
treatment at the Adolescent Unit of the Nova Scotia Hospital at
Dartmouth.
He had completed Grade IX at Truro but had no trade or
vocational training. He held occasional unskilled jobs in Ontario
and Dartmouth until 1979, when, after 22 weeks, he was laid off
for unexplained absences from work. He was unemployed after
the summer of 1979. While on probation he took treatment for
three months as required, and thereafter reported regularly and
apparently complied with the order until the present offences.
Doctor S.N. Akhtar, psychiatrist at the Nova Scotia Hospital
reported on February 13, 1980, respecting Thornton. He had first
observed Thornton on a one-month remand in February-March,
1977. He said:
... After appropriate psychological and neurological assessment, it was our
opinion that he was a young adolescent who had not developed appropriate
controls over his emotions and had many impulsive and sometimes aggressive
tendencies when his desires were frustrated. Prior to his admission he had
been undergoing considerable stress because of poor academic performance,
difficulty in making friends in school and also an ongoing conflict with his
mother. We believed that the offence which he was alleged to have committed
on January 24, 1977 (an incident of stabbing a young girl with a knife) was
related to this turmoil.
As already noted he then received three months' treatment. Dr.
Akhtar reported: "... He showed good response to treatment on
the Adolescent Unit and was discharged with the final diagnosis of
Adolescent Adjustment Reaction."
Doctor Akhtar described Thornton's childhood background,
home life and employment problems to which I have referred and
gave his diagnosis:
On examination Sandy presents as a young, asthenic male, who has grown
taller and who has become more self-confident in his demeanour since his last
admission. He is mildly irritable when talking about the alleged offence but is
generally cooperative and friendly and his affect is not inappropriate. He is
able to give a detailed and coherent account of the circumstances surrounding
the alleged offence. This account differs somewhat from the police version but
the discrepancies are of detail and emphasis rather than in substance. He
certainly does not show any evidence of derailment of association or delusional
thinking. Likewise, there is no evidence of hallucinations, impairment of
memory disorientation or any other psychotic symptoms or signs. He
attributes the incidents of the alleged offence to the fact that he had been
living "on the street" and because of the pressures of such lifestyle, he could
not think straight or make adequate plans for his behaviour.
On psychological tests, Sandy appears to be functioning at an average level
of intelligence with an I.Q. of 100. His personality profile shows many impul
sive, antisocial and somewhat aggressive trends alternating with moods of
futility and depression. There is no evidence of organic brain damage on these
tests and his E.E.G. is within normal limits.
In summary, we believe that Alexander Thornton is an adolescent male
who has not developed appropriate controls over his emotions and has incor
porated in his self-image some antisocial attitudes toward society. He has had
a serious and ongoing conflict with his parents, and especially with his mother
for many years and his personality development has obviously been influenced
by this conflict. He has grown out of his adolescence now but the conflicts
continue and the prognosis for a change in his relationship with his mother is
not very encouraging at this time. He does not, however, show any evidence
of serious mental illness. After the disposition of the charges against him, one
should recommend psychological counselling so that he can be helped to
understand how this conflict has affected the course of his life and how he
might deal with it in future.
The pre-sentence report of March 12, 1980, prepared by the
probation officer who had supervised Thornton reviewed his
background and contained the following:
Mr. Thornton always presented himself as a well groomed, mannerly, quiet
individual, who showed no signs of, nor verbalized his feelings of aggressive
behaviour while on probation. Mr. Thornton did feel that his mother was
always making difficulties for him, but did not feel he was part to blame for
these difficulties.
Mr. M. Johnson, Probation Officer in Truro, interviewed the accused at
Colchester Correctional Centre and informed this writer that prior to the
offence the accused felt he had little to live for and decided to give up. Mr.
Thornton had the belief that his family were not caring and inadequate in his
own inability to prove himself to them. At present, the accused feels sick and
disgusted with himself. According to Mr. Johnson, the accused would commit
suicide if given the opportunity for Mr. Thornton feels he has no future.
I have set forth almost all the material which was before the
learned trial Judge. Unfortunately, Judge Gunn in sentencing did
not explain why he gave such heavy sentences. He merely
referred very briefly to the "harrowing experiences" suffered by
the victim and to the great seriousness of the offences. He
mentioned the need to take into account deterrence, reformation
and the protection of the public. He considered that "there was
certainly premeditation on the part of this accused man". He
emphasized that "What must be done here is protection of the
public from these particular types of offence". 
