

THE FACTS

[6]    The complainant, who was 44 years of age at the date of the trial, gave evidence that at the relevant time in 1969 she was 14 years of age, about five feet tall, weighed about 80 pounds, and lived with her parents and siblings in Pelican Narrows, an aboriginal community in northern Saskatchewan.  The appellant, a member of the R.C.M.P., then 32 years of age, called at her home in uniform, and took her to the police station located in the community hall.  The complainant said she was “scared” and “terrified” because she did not know why he was taking her there and she did not know what she had done wrong.  At the police office, the appellant asked her if she was a virgin, and when she replied “no”, he asked whether her mother knew, to which she again replied “no”.  He then told her that if she did not have sex with him, he would tell her mother she was not a virgin.  They then had sex in a standing position with her pants at her knees.



[7]    When the complainant was asked if she cooperated with the appellant, she said that she had no choice, that she had to cooperate in view of his threat to tell her mother of her state of non-virginity.  When asked why she did not physically resist, she replied that as a 14 year old girl, she was not going fight an adult policeman and that she had her “survival instincts” and one was not to say or do anything.



[8]    The appellant did not give evidence at the trial.  However, a tape recording and a typewritten transcript of a telephone conversation between the complainant and the appellant, and a statement made by the appellant to the police were introduced into evidence.



[9]    In the telephone conversation, when the complainant asked the appellant why he raped her, he replied: “Well, ah, you know, it, it only went so far and I realized, you know, that you wanted nothing to do with it and I stopped, you know, we were standing there.”  He stated that sexual intercourse had not taken place and later, “I mean penetration never took place.”



[10]    In the statement to the police, the appellant said:

She was in my office and I do not remember exactly why she was there but ah, ah, at the end of our conversation, I asked her if she had ever had sexual relations with anyone.  She indicated that she had and ah, to, I don’t remember exactly how the conversation went but I had asked her if she would like to have sex with me.  Now, I thought that this was more of a joke than anything else, or spoke in a joking way.  Ah, and I left the office and I told her if she’d like to have sex with me, then to, just to undo her slacks.  I went down the hall and when I came back, her, her top button of her slacks was undone, her zipper was undone and I could see her, ah, her panties.  I approached her ah, and with, I was sexually aroused and I approached her and I believe I, I, ah, I touched her, her waist with my hands and at that moment, the disgusting nature of what was happening caused me to turn away and I went back behind the desk and when I turned, she had, I saw her doing up her slacks and her buttons and she left.
