B.           THE MATERIAL FACTS
[8]         On August 1, 2006, Alyssa Watson met up with the Mr. Niemi at about 9:30 p.m. Her body was discovered the next morning. Ms. Watson had suffered blunt force injuries to her head, but the cause of her death was ligature strangulation.

[9]          When discovered, Ms. Watson’s body was partially unclad. Her sweatshirt had been cut open from the neck down, and her bra had been cut down the middle. Her pants had been removed and draped over her legs, and her underwear was hanging from one knee when she was found.  Her shoes were placed neatly beside her.

[10]      Dr. Toby Rose, a forensic pathologist, testified that it appeared from the pattern of soil marks and abrasions on her body that Ms. Watson had been dragged, and that her pants were removed after she was dragged.

[11]      Ms. Watson’s body was mutilated. Her throat was slashed and she had two large incised wounds – one down the middle of her torso and one under her left breast. Dr. Rose testified that the cuts were made post-mortem.

[12]      There was no evidence of injury to her vagina or anus, and no semen was found on her or at the crime scene.

[13]      Mr. Niemi soon became the prime suspect in Ms. Watson’s killing, as he was the last person known to have been in her presence. Claims he made about his precise movements when he was with Ms. Watson were not borne out by security video footage.

[14]      The police investigation into Ms. Watson’s death soon stalled. A two-stage Mr. Big operation was initiated with Mr. Niemi as the target. The first stage of the operation began when an undercover operative – dubbed “Sonny” by the trial judge – befriended Mr. Niemi at an Adult Learning Centre course in Orillia, and began to involve Mr. Niemi in a feigned criminal organization. Efforts to obtain a confession from Mr. Niemi by holding out membership in return for a confession continued for two and a half months and included frequent meetings and an orchestrated traffic stop intended to provoke discussion of the Watson killing. When it failed to produce an incriminating admission, the Mr. Big operation was abandoned but was renewed a year later by undercover operatives that the trial judge called “Michael,” and “Vito,” purported associates of “Sony.”

[15]      Ultimately, during the second stage of this operation, in November and December 2008, Mr. Niemi made a series of statements to the Mr. Big operatives admitting to and describing the killing. Claims made by Mr. Niemi in those statements were hauntingly accurate regarding unpublicized details surrounding the killing.

[16]      His first confession was on November 25, 2008. He described hitting Ms. Watson with a whiskey bottle but it did not knock her out. He then strangled her, ultimately using her purse strap in doing so. He said that he received $10,000 from someone to kill her because she had stolen two kilograms of cocaine.

[17]      The following day, the appellant took the undercover officer to the crime scene and showed him where Ms. Watson had been killed, although he provided no further details of the murder.

[18]      On December 4, 2008, Mr. Niemi provided a Mr. Big operative with a written statement, which he claimed he wrote when he returned to the crime scene on his own:

I hit her from behind with a wisky bottle Nothing happened so I choked her with my Right arm the I used a purse strap then tryed to brake her neck then I cut her sweater at the V-point down a bit, then I took them off sweater + pants then I cut her throat right to left then I cut her left tit right to left then I cut her down the stomic then I pulled her into the right side of the trail and coverd her with her clothing then I Left.

[19]      On December 5, 2008, Mr. Niemi provided further details of the crime and re-enacted the killing. He described the location and position of Ms. Watson’s body, and the violence used – specifically, that he had struck her in the head, strangled her using her purse strap, and cut her throat, left breast and stomach. This time Mr. Niemi described the depth and nature of the incisions. He also detailed how he cut her sweater and he lay her pants on top of her legs.

[20]      With respect to the order in which events occurred, Mr. Niemi said he “finished the job” by strangling Ms. Watson with her purse strap before cutting her sweater off. He demonstrated the cutting of the sweater as occurring immediately after the strangulation while Ms. Watson was still in the same position she had been in when the strangulation began. Contrary to the opinion of Dr. Rose, Mr. Niemi described removing Ms. Watson’s pants before she was dragged.

[21]      Mr. Niemi consistently denied that the killing was sexual. He said that he removed her clothes and cut Ms. Watson to mislead the police into thinking the killing was sexual.

[22]      Mr. Niemi was arrested later that day and was charged with first degree murder. He was convicted on January 11, 2013.