B.           BACKGROUND
(a)   The Facts
[5]      On January 10, 2009, the complainant, a musician, who also works in the field of holistic medicine, went out on a date with a male co-worker.  After dinner, they then proceeded to another establishment where they had dessert and then attended at a live music venue. They stayed there only briefly, after which they attended at another night club.

[6]      The complainant decided to end her date with her co-worker early because he became jealous about her interaction with others. After parting company, she went to the bar and had a glass of water.

[7]      Up to this point, the complainant testified that she had consumed two glasses of wine with dinner, two glasses of champagne with dessert, and half of a double gin and soda at the night club. In her view, this was more alcohol than she would normally drink. She described herself as intoxicated. She believed she was not slurring or stumbling, but she acknowledges that she was having some difficulty with her memory of the events.

[8]      The complainant estimated that it was about 1:00 a.m. when she left the night club to hail a taxi. However, when she went outside, she was attracted to the sound of a man playing a guitar and singing. She lingered a while and started to sing along.

[9]      Shortly thereafter, as she was about to hail a taxi again, she encountered the appellant. She had not met him before. She testified that this was “a little blurry” but that the appellant approached her and initiated a conversation. She recalls they talked about music, martial arts and Buddhism. The appellant invited her back to his apartment. The complainant indicated that she was feeling vulnerable, having broken off her date earlier, but was also nonchalant and social. She did not see the appellant as a threat. At about 1:30 a.m. she accompanied the appellant to his apartment by taxi. They conversed during the cab ride. However, when they arrived at the appellant’s building, the complainant became apprehensive.

[10]   The complainant indicated that she should have just taken the cab home but that the appellant persuaded her to come inside instead. They walked up two flights of stairs to the appellant’s apartment where he lived with his mother. The appellant’s mother was present in her bedroom with the door open. The complainant saw her watching television.

[11]   The complainant and appellant first went to the kitchen, where the appellant poured them each a red-coloured alcoholic “cooler” beverage. They drank those beverages, after which the complainant requested a telephone, which she used to attempt to call friends to advise them of where she was. She did not speak to anyone directly but left a message for her boss.

[12]   After going briefly to the laundry room and seeing the appellant’s Buddhist shrine, the complainant asked if they could listen to some music. The appellant indicated they could in his room.

[13]   They then went to his room. There they engaged in some dancing and play fighting, which the complainant described as harmless and flirtatious. The complainant indicated that they then started “making out” while lying on the floor. During this time they did not exchange words, and at some point the complainant’s shirt was removed. Thus far, the complainant testified that the activity was consensual – she was not resisting.

[14]   The appellant then left the room wearing shorts and returned with his shorts removed and with a condom in his hand. He closed the door. At this point the complainant said something in her was “triggered” by the sight of the condom. She testified that she did not want to participate in any activity that involved a condom.

[15]   She indicated that her recollection of what happened next became disjointed and hazy “like if you were to take some cards and just kind of flash them, that’s sort of what this part feels like.”

[16]   It should be noted at this point that the complainant suffered from Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (“PTSD”) stemming from a sexual assault that had occurred exactly one year earlier. The complainant testified that this may have influenced her “flashy” memory of the incident with the appellant and her inability to recall certain things immediately following the event, such as the condom. However, portions of her memory returned after subsequent therapy.

[17]   She indicated that once the appellant returned to the room with the condom, she retreated into a corner of the room near a window and got into a defensive stance, crouched down, with her hands in front of her face. She indicated that he came towards her. She made a move towards the door and he grabbed her underwear from behind. This action caused her underwear to rip and made her fall forward onto his mattress. She testified that he then pinned her down on her back on the floor with one of his hands on her throat and one on her face, with his legs around her. She thought he was going to kill her, and she panicked. She wanted to get away. She again tried to move towards the door. He continued to grab at her underwear and she repeatedly said to him “stop”, “please, please, please stop.” She then began to scream for help, “as loud as [she] possibly could.” The complainant testified, “[a]s soon as I started screaming, that’s when he started to strangle me.”

[18]   While the complainant could not remember whether the appellant penetrated her, she believed he attempted to do so as he was trying to force his groin into hers. She was not aware whether he had put the condom on.

[19]   He then began repeating “I love you” over and over. She responded by saying this back to him in an attempt to calm him down, and loosen his grip. This appeared to the complainant to have had the desired effect, as the appellant loosened his grip, at which point the complainant managed to get away. 

[20]   When the complainant tried to open the door she realized it was locked and in a panic, she bruised her hand trying to pull it open. As she described it, she then “started to freak out.” She continued to scream for help and demanded to be let out of the room. She began to look around the room for anything she could use as a weapon. She saw her own belt, with a heavy buckle, and began to try to hit the appellant with it. She believed the appellant appeared shocked or scared and he then started to unlock the door. She indicated that he said, “I’m trying to open the door,” and once he got it open, he yelled at her to get out. She attempted to gather some of her clothing, including her shirt and her ripped underwear and ran out of the room.

[21]   As she ran from the room, she began hyperventilating. She saw the appellant’s mother who gestured to her to be quiet and led her to her shoes at the door of the apartment. During this time, the complainant was repeating, “Please help me. Please help me.”

[22]   The complainant then ran out of the building and down the street screaming for help. In a hysterical state, she came upon a snow plow operator. He called the police. When the police arrived, they found the complainant lying, still hysterical, in a snow bank. By this time, it was about 5:00 a.m. An officer assisted her into his police cruiser and eventually calmed her down so that she could recount what happened. The complainant directed the officer back to the appellant’s building. She became hysterical again when the appellant came out onto the street, where he was arrested by the police. A police officer then took the complainant to the hospital.

[23]   From photographs taken by the police, the complainant identified at trial physical injuries she sustained during this incident, including some bleeding from her right earlobe where a large earring had been removed during the incident. In addition, she suffered some bruising on her neck, shoulders, arms, wrist, knuckles, and shin, and a scratch on her breast. She identified bruising on her palm from trying to open the locked door. She also described bruising around her mouth that did not show up until shortly after the incident. This particular injury prevented her from going to work for two days. Finally, she testified that as a result of this incident she also suffered from PTSD and was counselled for three months at a women’s shelter, as well as by a doctor. She indicated that the symptoms of the PTSD included nightmares, insomnia, fear of men, anxiety, panic attacks, dissociation with her own body, shortness of breath, an inability to speak and feelings of victimization.