FACTS

Ten witnesses gave evidence, seven for the Crown; two for the accused Ellsworth, including Ellsworth himself; and one for the accused Chaisson.  The entire incident giving rise to the charges occurred within the time span of about fifteen to twenty minutes.  The location was at or near Blanchard Hall on the campus of the University of Prince Edward Island in Charlottetown.  All the witnesses who were present at the time of the incident were relatively unfamiliar with the surroundings.  Therefore, some of the evidence with respect to the proximity of buildings, parking lots and streets is at variance.  Some of the distances in relation to these physical surroundings may also be at variance.  In the circumstances of this case, I consider much of this evidence to be peripheral in nature.

The incident occurred on the night of October 18, 1992 between 11 p.m. and midnight.  While it was dark, I accept there was some lighting in the area and that none of the witnesses were impaired to any substantial degree by reason of darkness in making the observations to which they have testified.

On October 18, 1992, Jeff Thibodeau, Peter Gant, John Chisholm, Jamie Compton, Sean Hartegan, Tammy Martin, Tracey Smith, and Lisa Gaudet, all of whom are from the Summerside area, travelled to Charlottetown to visit with John Chisholm's sister who was a student at the University of Prince Edward Island and a resident of Blanchard Hall.  On the same night the two accused, who are from St. Louis, Prince County, Prince Edward Island, and Paul David Gallant who is from St. Edwards, Prince County, Prince Edward Island, also travelled to Charlottetown to attend a party at Blanchard Hall.

While both groups of people were at Blanchard Hall, they attended a party in the room of a resident other than Mr. Chisholm's sister.  There is evidence that while at this party the accused Chaisson and Sean Hartegan may have had words.  There is no evidence of any physical encounter.  The group from Summerside left the building around 10 p.m., and went to the Subway Restaurant, which is in close proximity to Blanchard Hall, obtained sandwiches and returned to the area surrounding Blanchard Hall to sit on the grass and eat the sandwiches.  Some time after taking up this position, the two accused accompanied by Mr. Gallant and three other females, namely Patricia MacDonald, Nicole Wagner and Angie MacLeod left Blanchard Hall and proceeded to their car which was in the parking lot close to where the group from Summerside were seated.  All proceeded in the direction of the car, except for Chaisson who stopped to talk to the members of the Summerside group. 

The Summerside group were sitting on an embankment that sloped down gradually and sloped back up from a small ditch.  The accused Chaisson asked John Chisholm for a cigarette.  Chaisson then sat down behind Thibodeau.  Chaisson and John Chisholm shared a cigarette and during this time Chaisson was flipping Thibodeau's hat from behind.  The accused Ellsworth was not present.  Thibodeau sensed trouble and expressed an interest to his companions in leaving; however, before this could take place, the accused Chaisson and Sean Hartegan engaged in an argument.  Chaisson pushed or punched Hartegan causing him to fall down.  Chaisson took a swing at Chisholm.  Chaisson and Thibodeau then began to fight.  Thibodeau says he engaged in the fight with Chaisson to break up the altercation between Chaisson and Thibodeau's friends  or alternatively, to prevent a further altercation. 


Ellsworth had by this time returned to the immediate area.  The fight between Chaisson and Thibodeau was underway.  What transpired from this point is the subject of substantial divergence in the evidence of the various witnesses.

Lisa Gaudet, who was the only person not consuming alcohol that night, states that when the fight started and had been underway for a few minutes, Jamie Compton stood up and was pushed by Ellsworth down the embankment.  She states Ellsworth then walked over to the fight, grabbed Thibodeau by the shoulder, turned him around slightly and punched him on the side of the head causing him to fall to the ground, apparently unconscious.  Then, according to Ms. Gaudet, Chaisson started to kick Thibodeau in the face.  She also testified that John Chisholm attempted to assist Thibodeau but Ellsworth prevented him from doing so by hitting him.  She states that after Ellsworth hit Thibodeau she spoke to Jamie Compton and urged him to help Thibodeau.  He was unable to do so because of a sore ankle suffered as the result of his push into the ditch by Ellsworth. 

John Chisholm stated that he initially saw both Chaisson and Thibodeau fighting.  He observed Chaisson hitting Thibodeau in the face.  His attention was diverted away from the fight when the altercation developed between Jamie Compton and Ellsworth.  He says that Ellsworth hit Compton who fell into the ditch.  He then looked back to the fight and observed Thibodeau lying on the ground and a shoe flying in the air.  He stated that, in his view, it was Chaisson's shoe; however, he could not say he saw Chaisson actually kick Thibodeau. 

John Chisholm states that he was attempting to assist Jamie Compton when he was punched by Ellsworth.  When he got up, Ellsworth was not in the vicinity.  He did not see Ellsworth hit Thibodeau.

Mr. Peter Gant also did not see Ellsworth hit Thibodeau.  He did, however, observe the fight between Chaisson and Thibodeau.  When he observed Thibodeau lying on the ground and being kicked by Chaisson, he states he went to Jamie Compton for assistance.  He indicated Compton was unable to respond because of a twisted ankle apparently suffered as a result of falling into the ditch.  He states Chaisson continued to kick Thibodeau and, to protect Thibodeau, he lay over his head.  

Thibodeau states that he and Chaisson were involved in a fight and were exchanging punches when he was turned around and hit by Ellsworth.  While he says this all happened in a split second he does identify Ellsworth as the person who struck him.  Throughout the entire night this was the only time he had seen Ellsworth.   He does not remember anything else until he awoke the next day in the Prince County Hospital in Summerside. 

Angela MacLeod, who was one of the three females returning with the two accused to their car, states that when all members of their group, except Chaisson, had returned to the car, they could hear shouting in the vicinity of where Chaisson had stopped to talk to the Summerside group.  They then walked back over to this area.  Ellsworth was standing beside her.  She then asked Ellsworth for the keys to the car, and she went back to the car to attempt to start it.  When the car wouldn't start, she returned.  At this point in time, Ellsworth and another were having an argument.  She did not know the other individual's name.  She was unable to observe Chaisson except that she knew he was fighting in a crowd of people to her right.  She then observed Ellsworth, and the fellow with whom he had been arguing, engage in a fight which resulted in the other individual rolling down the embankment.  After this incident she saw Ellsworth walk towards the group where Chaisson was fighting.  Before Ellsworth got to the group, it dispersed.  At this time all members of her group returned to the car.  Upon returning to the car Chaisson was without his shirt.  Ms. MacLeod returned to the area of the fight to look for his shirt, and she did observe someone lying on the ground with another person kneeling at his head.

The essence of the evidence of Angela MacLeod is that Ellsworth was not near the fight between Chaisson and Thibodeau when she saw him that night.  Therefore, she concludes, Ellsworth did not hit Thibodeau.  The only time he could have been in this area, according to Ms. MacLeod, was when she returned to the car to attempt to start it.  At all other times he was within her sight. 


Ellsworth testifies he did not hit Jeff Thibodeau.  He stated that he observed a fight break out between Chaisson and Thibodeau while he was at his car in the parking lot.  When he returned to the scene, he observed a girl, Lisa Gaudet, attempting to wake Jamie Compton from a sleep.  Compton awoke, got up, and started to run in the direction of where Thibodeau and Chaisson were fighting.  Ellsworth states that he then punched Compton in the mouth causing him to fall down the embankment.

The next thing Ellsworth observed was a fellow coming after him from behind.  He turned quickly and hit this fellow who, although not identified by Ellsworth at the time, was John Chisholm.  Before this occurred, he had observed the fight and saw that  Chaisson was on his hands and knees being hit on the head by Thibodeau.  The next time he glanced in that direction he observed Chaisson looking toward the ground.  He started to walk toward the crowd when it dispersed and saw Chaisson approaching him without a shirt.  Both of them returned to their car.

Ellsworth admits to hitting Compton and Chisholm.  He was charged with assaulting Chisholm and has entered a guilty plea to that charge.  He denies that he hit Thibodeau.

Finally, evidence was given by Paul David Gallant on behalf of Chaisson.  Mr. Gallant has not been charged.  He came forward a few weeks prior to the trial to assist Ellsworth and Chaisson. 

His evidence is that after initially breaking up a brief altercation between two females, Mr. Gallant proceeded in the direction of where Chaisson and Thibodeau were fighting.  He says that he saw Thibodeau holding Chaisson down on the ground, with his shirt pulled over his head.  He also saw Thibodeau swinging a broken beer bottle.  He felt Thibodeau would cut Chaisson so he kicked Thibodeau on the head causing him to fall over backwards on the ground unconscious.  He asked Chaisson if he was okay and then he started to walk away.  Chaisson did not come with him immediately.  When Mr. Gallant was a distance away from the scene, he looked behind to see Chaisson following.  There was a period of time after Thibodeau was knocked unconscious that Mr. Gallant did not observe Chaisson.

He does admit to delivering one kick and at the time he was wearing a soft shoe.  He says there was a small bruise on his foot as a result of his kick, and he also says the kick was delivered to the head or facial area.   Mr. Gallant is uncertain as to whether the kick caused the severe injuries which Thibodeau suffered.  He also was uncertain as to exactly who he kicked.

As a result of the altercation Thibodeau suffered serious injuries to his eye, bruising of his lips and abrasions to his face.  He was observed to be unconscious by a number of witnesses including Constable Hughes of the University of Prince Edward Island Security Force and Constable Philip Claybourne of the Charlottetown City Police.  He was also observed to be bleeding from the eyes and around the mouth. 

From the scene, he was taken by ambulance to the Queen Elizabeth Hospital where he remained that night.  He was then transferred to the Prince County Hospital in Summerside where he regained consciousness the next day.  Two days later, word was received by Doctor D.G. Stewart, who had attended him at the Queen Elizabeth Hospital, from Doctor Alan MacKay in Summerside, that the left eye was painful.  Accordingly, on October 21, 1992 Doctor Stewart again saw Thibodeau and observed that his left eye was filled with blood.  The condition was considered serious enough by Doctor Stewart that he recommended referral to Halifax under the care of Doctor Brian O'Brien.  A clot of blood that had accumulated in the entire chamber of the eye was removed; however, Doctor O'Brien reported to Doctor Stewart that there had been damage to the entire part of the eye including the iris.  Doctor O'Brien believes a cataract will develop.  Doctor Stewart observed Thibodeau again on November 5, 1992 at which time his visual acuity was less than 20/400. 


Thibodeau spent in excess of two weeks in hospital immediately following the incident.  As well he returned to Halifax in January, 1993 to have an operation to relieve the pressure.  He indicates that vision in the eye is blurred, and he has been advised the situation will not likely improve.  He also states that peripheral vision over his left shoulder is minimal.  Pictures of Thibodeau taken after the fight substantiate injury in the area of both eyes, particularly the left eye.  The pictures also substantiate that he suffered cuts and abrasions to the lips and face.  All resulted in migraine headaches and pain in his jaw.