 

BRIEF OVERVIEW OF RELEVANT FACTS

 

[6]To understand the legal issues and arguments that follow it is important to have a brief overview of the relevant facts. As a number of the issues are “fact specific” the facts will be considered in greater detail as they relate to each specific issue at the appropriate place in this Judgment.

 

[7]Briefly the facts are as follows:

 

i)  As the result of an ongoing criminal investigation the investigators (a combined team of RCMP and Calgary City Police) decided to search garbage behind the Accused’s residence at 443 88th Avenue S.E. They did so on 6 separate occasions being December 4th, 5th, 8th, 12th, 16th and 17th 2003. All of these searches were done without a warrant and on more than one occasion certain items were seized (details of what was seized are found in paras. 25, 26, 27 and 28 of Exhibit 2). All of the seized goods were retrieved from green “garbage” bags in either a plastic or metal garbage can that were placed in an “opening” or “indentation” in a fence at the rear of the Accused’s residence adjacent to the alley.

 

ii) Based on information obtained from the ongoing investigation; informer information;

and the evidence obtained from the warrantless garbage searches an Information to

Obtain a Search Warrant (I.T.O.) was sworn by the lead investigator, Cst. Ryan Smart (of

the R.C.M.P.) on 22nd December, 2003 (Exhibit 9). Details of what was seized from the

warrantless garbage searches are outlined again in paragraphs 41-52 of the I.T.O.        

 

iii) On 22nd December , 2003, based on the I.T.O. a Warrant to Search the Accused’s premises at 443 88th Avenue S.E. was granted by a Provincial Court Judge in Calgary.

 

iv) On 23rd December, 2003, at approximately 8:40 a.m. the police TAC team (dressed in protective clothing and breathing apparatae) forcibly entered the residence at 443 88th Avenue S.E. The Accused (the only occupant of the house) who had been sleeping in the master bedroom was handcuffed; allowed to dress; and removed from the residence immediately and placed in a police vehicle outside of the residence.

 

v) At 9:27 a.m. the Accused was read his Charter rights in the police vehicle and driven immediately to the R.C.M.P. headquarters in Airdrie arriving at approximately 10:00 a.m.

 

vi) At 10:11 a.m. the Accused exercised his right to counsel and spoke with counsel of choice, Patrick Horner by telephone. The Accused was advised by the police that there would be a bail hearing and the Crown would not be opposing his release. After talking to counsel the Accused was placed in the cells to await his bail hearing but was advised later in the evening by the police that in fact the Crown had changed its position and would be opposing his release. He attempted to contact Mr. Horner to advise of this change of position and seek further legal advice, but was unable to make contact with Mr. Horner who was on an airline flight to Kelowna B.C. Mr. Horner received the messages from the Accused upon de-boarding and made attempts to call the Accused but was unsuccessful and as a result left messages for the Accused.

 

vii) At 2:23 a.m. Thursday 24th December, 2003, the Accused had a bail hearing with a Justice of the Peace by telephone. The Accused adjourned the matter until Monday the 29th December at 9:00 a.m. in Calgary, at which time he was released.