The learned sentencing judge described the circumstances thus:

     The circumstances leading up to these events were that sometime around six forty-five in the morning the two accused were in the Uplands area of Victoria and saw a Jaguar car, which was parked at the residence of the victims Taylor.  They decided that they would steal that car, and to that end they broke into the residence at which the car was situated, to try and find the keys to make the theft somewhat easier.

     The entry was gained through a small window which was, in fact, the only unsecured window in the residence, and it was one that Mr. Traviss, of somewhat smaller stature, could get into.  He then went to another window, opened it to allow Mr. Evers, who is much larger, to get in.

     They went through the house looking for the keys.  In the process they disabled two telephones.  At some point during this search for the keys they opened the bedroom door and saw the two victims apparently asleep in bed.  There is some possibility that Mrs. Taylor awoke or stirred at this point in time and the two accused went back downstairs to another area in the lower part of the house and returned to the bedroom, one armed with a golf club, one armed with a hockey stick.

     Mr. Traviss had the hockey stick and he commenced to hit Dr. Taylor with that stick while he was in his bed.  Simultaneously, or at least very close to the same time, Mr. Evers took the golf club and began to strike Mrs. Taylor.

     Mr. Taylor received cuts and injuries to his head.  He says, in his victim impact statement, that he still has two indentations on his forehead, although in all other respects the injuries were not as bad as they could have been.  Mrs. Taylor received some wounds in fending off the blows.  Mr. Taylor also received some blows to the genital area.

     At some point the two accused were able to leave the victims.  They then were able to find the keys and apparently Mr. Taylor's wallet.  They left the house, taking with them the Jaguar automobile.  They went to the B.C. Ferry landing at Swartz Bay and boarded the 8 a.m. ferry to Vancouver.

     Fortunately, the Taylors were able to get eventually to a phone, although they were injured and bleeding, and called for help.  The police notified the B.C. Ferry Corporation and word was passed that the vehicle was apparently on the 8 a.m. sailing, and the police were waiting for the two accused when they landed in Vancouver.

     The police - - what I would call, I suppose, a running roadblock, was set up, with a police car in front and police cars behind.  Eventually, I think, some five police cars in all were involved.  At one point, as they were proceeding down the causeway, the emergency equipment was activated and the accused Evers, who was driving the vehicle, was signalled to stop.

     There is suggestion that Mr. Traviss as a passenger was somewhat encouraging in what happened next, but, in any event Mr. Evers did not stop.  The chase continued for some period of time.  During the course of it Mr. Evers deliberately rammed one of the police cars, forcing it into a pole.  Eventually the car was topped and the two accused were arrested.