PRESTON, P.J. (Orally)

         The sentencing hearing we now conclude stems from an incident that happened quite some time ago; on January 2nd of 2002.  During a three day preliminary hearing, I heard evidence of extremely serious crimes committed that morning by the accused, Raymond Armstrong.  The facts I heard are as follows:

         On January 2nd of 2002, C.A., and his common-law wife, A.S., were sleeping in their home in a residence in the city of Winnipeg.  Also sleeping in the basement suite of the same residence was D.S., the brother of A.S.  Also asleep on the main floor of the residential suite were the couple's three infant children, aged six, nine and ten.

         Around seven o'clock in the morning, Mr. A. and Ms. S. were awakened by a loud knock on the front window.  Two young women were ostensibly looking for a third party.  Mr. A. told them that the third party, his cousin, was not present and told them to depart.  He tried to go back to sleep but was awakened a few minutes later by another knock on the window.  The young girls wanted to use the phone.  He did not feel threatened by them and told them that they could use the phone for a second.  He went into the front vestibule area and unfortunately opened his door to his suite in the house.  Two adult males immediately entered the vestibule.  One of the males, Mr. Armstrong, immediately brandished what looked like a sawed-off shotgun and put the gun right up to Mr. A.'s face.  He hit Mr. A. with the gun and told him not to be a hero. 

         During the next harrowing minutes, Raymond Armstrong told C.A., the father of three infant children, that he, Mr. Armstrong, could "waste" all of his children "with one shot" and while he was saying this he was aiming the shotgun at the three sleeping children.  Mr. A. was genuinely afraid that Mr. Armstrong would carry out his threat.  He immediately gave up any resistance he may have contemplated and began to assist the robbers to pack his valuables into various bags. 

         Even though he did not resist, C.A. was struck by Mr. Armstrong in the face and arms and chest and ribs.  An imprint of the barrel of the shotgun or the weapon was left on the cheek and chest of Mr. A.  At one point, Raymond Armstrong pushed the barrel of the shotgun into the body of Mr. A. while he was prone on the floor.  He had been knocked to the floor on more than one occasion by either the butt of the shotgun or the barrel of the shotgun carried by Mr. Armstrong.  And when I say “shotgun”, I am talking about the imitation weapon, what they thought was a shotgun.

          Mr. A. told the court that he had been hit mostly with the barrel and hard enough to knock him down and hit in the face and chest.  Mr. Armstrong threatened to kill him, so he complied with his demands.  At one point Mr. Armstrong knocked Mr. A. over a table and he still has a scar on the right side of the middle of his back.

         The assailants stole electronics, video games, Nintendo games, CD's and his cousin's stereo system.  As Mr. A. succinctly put it, "Pretty much my house innards."  All of Mr. A.'s savings had gone towards the property that was stolen.  Nonetheless, he felt happy just to be alive.  At one point, Mr. Armstrong said to Mr. A., "After I shoot you, I'm going to shoot them," and pointed the gun towards the children. 

         During the attack, Mr. Armstrong told Mr. A. that he can come back at any time and kill him.  He pressed the barrel of the weapon on Mr. A. with all his weight and "mashed" him in the face when he was leaving.  Mr. A.'s gum in fact is still indented from the force of the blow with the weapon.

         His common-law spouse, A.S., testified that when she saw the guy with the gun, he said to her, "Girl, don't move."  She ended up just standing there the whole time.  She told the court that the guy held the gun to the kids and waved it.  She helped the robbers put things in a bag.  She was scared and she was shaking.  Mr. Armstrong stole $40 from her purse. 

         Her brother, D.S., the roommate of the couple, testified that he was asleep in the basement and he woke up when he heard the commotion upstairs, hearing someone yelling repeatedly for money and jewellery.  He was discovered in the basement.  Even though he did not specifically identify Mr. Armstrong as the person who hit him, he was hit in the head with the butt end of a "shotgun" by the man holding the weapon and needed eight stitches to heal the wound.  His jewellery was stolen from him as well as his VCR.

         Later that day, Mr. Armstrong pawned some of the items stolen from the victims.  His fingerprint was found on the pawn slip.  When the police followed a well-marked investigatory path to his door, they found a box of shotgun shells on top of the TV in his apartment.

         He was eventually arrested in September of 2002.  He later released on bail in January of 2003.  He elected trial in the Queen's Bench Superior Court but failed to appear at his preliminary hearing in Provincial Court in August of 2003.  I've heard that the victims dutifully attended to the preliminary hearing and were obviously inconvenienced.  A warrant issued for Mr. Armstrong.  He was once again arrested but not until October of 2003.  He has remained in custody.