[1]       On March 10, 2013, Tania Cowell (“Tania”) was found deceased in her apartment in Stoney Creek. Earlier that day, Haiden Suarez-Noa, (“Haiden”) had turned himself into the police in Guelph and confessed to having killed Tania. However, he maintained that he never intended to murder Tania.



[2]       At trial, the jury did not accept that Mr. Suarez-Noa did not intend to murder Tania or that he was subject to the legal excuse of provocation, as it is defined in the Criminal Code and related jurisprudence.

[3]       Based on all of the evidence, Mr. Suarez-Noa was convicted by a jury of the second degree murder of Ms. Cowell.  As a result, he is to be sentenced to life imprisonment.  The only matter to be decided is the period that he must serve before he is eligible to apply for parole, which must be fixed at between 10 and 25 years.

[4]       Ms. Booy on behalf of the Crown submits that the period of parole ineligibility be increased to 17 to 18 years based on the numerous, serious aggravating features in this case, the lack of mitigating elements, and after-the-fact conduct, amongst other considerations.  In addition, the Crown requests a prohibition order pursuant to s. 109 of the Criminal Code, a non-contact provision and a DNA order.

[5]       Mr. Gill, counsel for Mr. Suarez-Noa, argues that the parole ineligibility period be limited to the minimum 10 to 12 year range.  The defence submits that the court ought not to increase the period of parole ineligibility based on the lack of aggravating features including, no cogent evidence of planning or deliberation, the spontaneous conduct giving rise to the stabbing along with the significant mitigating factors in this case. Counsel suggests that his client has demonstrated remorse by his plea to a lesser and included offence, his turning himself into the police and admitting the killing.  It is submitted that this acceptance of responsibility and remorse, albeit raising a legal issue for the jury’s consideration at trial, are all substantial mitigating factors and accrues to his benefit. The court ought to consider Haiden’s rehabilitation prospects and eventual reintegration back into the community. There appears to be no dispute with regards to the ancillary orders.

The circumstances of the offence:

[6]       On March 8 into March 9, 2013, Tania and Haiden had protracted arguments via text messages. Tania repeatedly berated Haiden. Tania told Haiden she already gave him two chances to change and start helping her and that she was not going to give him a third chance. She told him the relationship was over, and to start looking for his own apartment. Haiden beseeched Tania to take him back and promised to change if she would give him one more chance. Initially, she refused. However, Tania had a change of heart and allowed Haiden to return to the Stoney Creek apartment.

[7]       Haiden returned to Stoney Creek and within hours their arguing recommenced. However, this was the last straw for Haiden. He was enraged by the constant bickering, Tania’s ingratitude, being kicked out of the apartment and her potentially leaving with his son. Filled with frustration and rage, Haiden grabbed a knife from the kitchen and advanced on Tania. She screamed as she ran toward the bedroom. Haiden intentionally drove the knife into her back. Tania staggered and fell into a door in the hallway. Haiden continued to stab Tania as she fell and landed on her back. Haiden stabbed her over and over again. Tania had sustained 11 stab wounds to her neck, shoulder, chest area, one of which was to her back. Four of the stab wounds on their own would have been fatal.

[8]       Within seconds or minutes, Tania lay lifeless in a pool of her blood on the hallway floor. Following the murder, Haiden dropped the knife, grabbed Tania’s legs and dragged her into the living room. He began wiping the blood off of her face, arm and chest, until realizing that effort was ineffective. Haiden snapped a picture of her lifeless body on his cell phone. He left the apartment with his infant son and drove to Guelph. 12 hours later, Haiden turned himself into the Guelph police and admitted stabbing Tania.

[9]       The pathologist testified that Tania’s cause of death was due to stab wounds of the neck, chest and back resulting in exsanguination and haemothorax. Death would have ensued in a matter of seconds or minutes.

Victim Impact Statements:

[10]       Fifteen victim impact statements (“VIS”) were filed with the Court.  Members of Ms. Cowell’s immediate and extended family and friends read their respective victim impact statements.  A community VIS was read in by Nancy Smith, the Executive Director of Interval House of Hamilton and Chair of the Woman Abuse Working Group.

[11]       The loss of Tania has greatly affected all members of the Cowell family. They will never be the same.  I cannot do justice to the heartfelt, expressive, and deep emotions felt and expressed by the various individuals in their respective VIS by summarizing them here. While I will only be referring to segments of some of the VIS’s, all of them have been reviewed and considered.

[12]       Tania’s sister in law, Julie Cowell describes her own experience from the loss of Tania as well as how the whole situation affected and affects Bailun as well as her own young children.  She and her husband, Ivon are raising Bailun and despite these tragic events, he is so fortunate to have such a warm and caring family and grandparents to support him. The type of person that Tanya was is so well described in the VIS presented by both Julie, Ivon, other family members, Jodie Manktelow, Chris Smyllie, TJ Schuurmans and others.

[13]       I was particularly moved by Alyssa Cowell’s eloquent VIS, wherein as a result of this entire event she wonders if she will ever get to “normal” and still be able to be a kid. From her comments, it is evident that she grew up very quickly, having to fill a role of great responsibility in relation to Bailun.  This is accompanied with feelings of loss and grief.  She concludes that her childhood died with her aunt.

[14]       Before I move on, and without taking anything away from the profoundly emotional and sincere comments referenced in the various VIS, I am unable to consider any of the statements therein with respect to what the various writers opine is the appropriate sentence or their suggestions about any maximum sentencing considerations or remarks related to retribution. Those statements go beyond the admissible nature and scope of VIS in criminal proceedings.

[15]       However, I want the family and friends of Tania Cowell to know that I am aware of the utter devastation caused by her death. I have not failed to understand your pain and sorrow and I have not forgotten the tragedy of Tania’s death. Indeed, Bailun’s loss of his biological mother cannot be overstated. No one in this courtroom could help but not be moved by the heartfelt sense of bereavement and loss felt by the Cowells’ and extended family, friends and other interested persons, which has been vividly described throughout the sentencing hearing.

[16]       Mr. Suarez-Noa has been convicted of murder and will be sentenced to a mandatory life sentence. That same sentence applies to every murderer and the courts do not differentiate between the killing of an innocent young woman, cherished by her family and friends, and the killing of any other human being. Nothing I do here will bring Tania back or expunge the grief felt by her family.  However, I cannot exact vengeance.  The focus at this stage of the proceedings is what sentence I am to impose based on fairness, balancing of the judicial principles, the case law and on the circumstances of this case and the offender.

The circumstances of the offender:

[17]       No pre-sentence report was prepared in this case.  No evidence was adduced at the sentencing hearing on behalf of Mr. Suarez-Noa. Submissions by counsel were made on his behalf. I have also learned much about the offender during the course of the trial, through the evidence presented by the parties and from his own testimony.

[18]       Mr. Suarez-Noa was born and raised in Cuba. He had some advanced education and is a very intelligent man. He speaks several languages.

[19]       Mr. Suarez-Noa has been gainfully and fully employed while living in Cuba and Canada. Once Tania was pregnant, he financially supported Tania and his son. He appeared to have taken a great interest in his son’s upbringing.

[20]       The offender has no prior criminal record and has no criminal antecedents. There are no prior reported incidents of domestic assaults or violence.  His friend, Yoel Morales, described the offender as a caring individual who has been helpful to him in gaining employment.

[21]       When addressing the Court, Mr. Suarez-Noa expressed regret for his actions, and the pain he has caused to all those who have been affected by Tania’s death. He says that “not a day goes by where he does not feel deep regret”. He is especially remorseful for the impact of his action on his son, Bailun. He also regrets the day when he will need to speak with Bailun about what had occurred. He still hopes and desires to be a part of his son’s life.
