On December 11th 2017, The South East RCMP were contacted by Colchester District RCMP in Nova Scotia for assistance by Cpl. Marc ROSE. Information had been received that an individual, Gary Beaton, driving a Grey Toyota Echo was travelling to the Shediac area for the purpose of obtaining “Ice” pills. Surveillance of the grey Toyato [sic] Echo started in Nova Scotia by the RCMP travelling to New-Brunswick. South East RCMP joined surveillance on the vehicle in the Moncton area. The vehicle was then followed by the surveillance team and observed attending for a short period 825 Route 133 in Boudreau Ouest New Brunswick, residence known to be the residence of Randy SCOPIE. The vehicle was then followed leaving the residence. Vehicle was pulled over near the Nova Scotia and New Brunswick Border and 2 males were arrested, one of which was Gary Beaton. Gary Beaton was found in possession of 2 bags of Methamphetamine pills with approximately f [sic] 2000 pills.



On the same day, following the arrest of Gary Beaton, a Search Warrant under s. 11 of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act was drafted for the residence of Randy SCOPIE at 825 Route 133 in Boudreau Ouest, New Brunswick and granted by Judge Pierre Arsenault [sic].



At around 22:00 hrs on the same day, South East Shediac RCMP conducted a Search Warrant at the residence of Randy SCOPIE at 825 Route 133 in Boudreau Ouest, Province of New Brunswick and County of Westmorland. At the time of the search, Randy SCOPIE, his spouse, Jenny CLEMENTS, and three young children were present in the residence. (13 months old, 5 years old and 9 years old).



Randy SCOPIE was arrested for possession of methamphetamine for the purpose of trafficking S. 5(2) CDSA. Randy SCOPIE was searched incidental to arrest and found to be in possession of $4305.00 cash wrapped with an elastic in his short pocket. Randy SCOPIE was read his rights and transported to Shediac RCMP where he spoke to a lawyer. Randy SCOPIE was cooperative with police during the whole process. Randy SCOPIE has been in remanded in detention on the charges presently before court since December 11, 2017.



Jenny CLEMENTS was detained and released on scene as there were three young children in the residence and she left with children. She was advised that she would be dealt with later. Jenny Clements was arrested the following day and release on an Undertaking to a Judge after a bail hearing on December 13, 2017.



Members of the Shediac RCMP conducted search of the residence. Several scales (3), an industrial money counting machine, a video recorder for a surveillance system, a large sum of money and several kind of drugs were located in the Kitchen, office, basement and garage.
