1.     The offence occurred at or near Lincoln, County of Sunbury and Province of New Brunswick, on or about January 26, 2017.

2.      Joe-Anna Hachey and Evan Polchies had been staying at a friend's residence for a couple of days prior to the incident for which they are charged.

3.      They had just met a few weeks before. They were planning to go to Edmonton, Alberta together.

4.      In the days leading up to the incident the parties were on a "bender".

5.      On the date in question, they had run out of cocaine and started looking through Hachey's Messenger contacts for someone to rob of cocaine. They settled on Robert Smith (aka Bobby Martin Jr.). Hachey contacted Smith and requested he come to her with $500 worth of cocaine. They had several exchanges on Facebook. Hachey never mentions she was with Polchies (the two men apparently had unsettled issues). Polchies had a high powered assault rifle with him at the trailer where they were staying.

6.      Before Smith arrived at the residence, Polchies told Hachey that he would shoot Smith with the rifle if needed. Polchies told Hachey that he was going to use the gun to scare Smith, and if he had to, he would shoot him in the leg. The gun was always loaded.

7.      When Smith and his girlfriend arrived in his vehicle, Hachey opened the door and insisted that he come to the door with the cocaine. Smith was reluctant to enter the residence for fear of being robbed, and asked her to come to the car. Hachey told him there were kids inside and therefore she could not go outside.

8.      Smith came to the front door of the trailer; Hachey opened the door and told Smith she was going to get something from the back room.

9.      According to Hachey, Polchies was standing to the side of the door holding the rifle. As she was going towards the back of the trailer, Hachey heard Smith say "really man?" She then heard gun shots. She recalled hearing Smith say "you shot me in the dick", then heard the door open, and believed Smith left the residence.

10.     Polchies left the residence with the assault rifle after the shooting. Hachey saw blood inside the house in front of the doorway and cleaned the blood with a towel. When Polchies came back he disposed of the towel.

11.     They left the residence in a vehicle and eventually ended up in Benton, New Brunswick, at an acquaintance's residence where they remained on the run until they were arrested, without incident, by the RCMP on January 29, 2017. Hachey stated they both consumed the drugs stolen from Smith while they were on the run. Hachey posted a Facebook message saying she had killed Smith for the purpose of making it appear as though she killed him in self-defence and to take the blame off Polchies.
