[7]        On New Years Eve 2017 Cst. Corey Bryant was the primary on-call officer on Grand Manan. Cst. Bryant has been with the RCMP for 10 years and has spent the past 4 years with the Grand Manan detachment. Cst. Matthew Paynter was also on call that evening.  It was extremely cold that evening.



[8]        At 3:21 a.m. on January 1, 2018, RCMP dispatch advised Cst. Bryant of a fatal accident involving two vehicles on Route 776 near Anchorage Provincial Park.  Route 776 is the main road that connects the two ends of Grand Manan Island.



[9]        Cst. Bryant asked dispatch to call out Cst. Paynter. He received a call from dispatch at 3:24 a.m.



[10]      Both officers drove south on Route 776, in the direction of Seal Cove, from their respective homes located north of the accident scene.  Cst. Paynter travelled 5 or 6 kilometres and Cst. Bryant drove approximately 10 kilometres. Both officers had arrived at the accident scene by 3:37 a.m.



[11]      Cst. Bryant arrived first.  He spoke to Deputy Fire Chief Dave Burgess who advised him that one of his firemen, Theron Ingalls, was driving to the scene and had witnessed somebody walking in a direction away from the accident scene. Cst. Bryant then spoke to Theron Ingalls who told him that on his way to the accident scene he observed a male person walking away from the accident scene, headed southbound on Route 776.



[12]      At that point, Cst. Bryant communicated to Cst. Paynter, who was in his police vehicle behind Cst. Bryant, that he would follow up on the lead that a male was seen walking southbound.  Cst. Paynter would remain at the scene.



[13]      Cst. Bryant continued to drive in a southbound direction on Route 776 towards Seal Cove looking for the person walking along the road. He did not see anyone.  He looped around when he reached the High C’s Convenience Store and parked. He radioed Cst. Paynter and asked him to confirm the identity of the registered owner of the truck. Cst. Paynter advised him the truck was registered to Daniel Greene.  Cst. Paynter knew Daniel Greene was at a different address than the one associated with the registration.  Cst.  Bryant searched a computer system in his police vehicle and found Daniel Greene’s address. Cst. Bryant then drove to that address which is located near Seal Cove.



[14]      I note that Cst. Paynter testified that he radioed Cst. Bryant as he was driving to Daniel Greene’s house and told him that Theron Ingalls had confirmed to him that he knew the person he saw walking or running away from the accident scene was Daniel Greene. However, Cst. Bryant agreed on cross-examination that his synopsis of events prepared later that day do not reflect this.  He testified that what he knew was that Theron Ingalls had seen an unknown male walking southbound on Route 776.



[15]     As Cst. Bryant was arriving at Daniel Greene’s house, dispatch advised him they had just received a call from an individual who thought his friend had gotten into an accident. The caller indicated he was with the driver.  Cst. Bryant realized the address of the caller was the same as the address for Daniel Greene.



[16]      Cst. Bryant arrived at Daniel Greene’s address at approximately 4:05 a.m. A male exited the house and identified himself to Cst. Bryant as Austin Green, the person who had just called the police.  He clarified he was not related to Daniel Greene. Austin Green told Cst. Bryant “I think my friend got into the accident and hurt him”.  Cst. Bryant asked Austin Green “hurt who” and Austin Green told him he meant the person at the collision scene. Cst. Bryant then asked Austin Green who his friend was, and Austin Green said, “Daniel Greene”.



[17]      Austin Green told Cst. Bryant that his girlfriend Kathryn Brown had been “sober driving” that evening and had left Daniel Greene’s house.  On her way back to the house she came across an accident. She called Austin Green and told him to see if Daniel Greene was in the house.  Austin Green searched the house and could not find Daniel. Daniel’s truck was not at the house.  Only Daniel was missing from the house.



[18]      Austin Green and another individual, Brandon, got into a vehicle and drove toward the accident scene.  As they headed towards North Head on Rte. 776, they came across Daniel walking and they picked him up.



[19]      Cst. Bryant asked Austin Green if they had picked up anyone else. He said they were not looking for anyone else and they did not pick up anyone else.



[20]      Cst. Bryant also asked Austin Green if Daniel Greene had been drinking. Austin Green said, “It’s New Years Eve; we’ve all been drinking”.  Cst. Bryant asked if he saw Daniel Greene drink alcohol and Austin told him he had.



[21]      Cst. Bryant then asked where Daniel Greene was, and Austin told him he thought he was on the back deck of the house crying and talking to his mother on the phone. Cst. Bryant got out of his vehicle and went around to the back of the house but Daniel Greene was not there.  Cst. Bryant went back to his vehicle and asked Austin Green to get into the vehicle.  Austin Green again went over what he had told Cst. Bryant.  He clarified that Daniel Greene was walking southbound away from the accident scene, towards Seal Cove, when they picked him up.



[22]      Daniel Greene then exited the front door of the house.  Cst. Bryant noted he was wearing a blue shirt and grey pants with no jacket or gloves or hat, although it was extremely cold out.  He noted Daniel Greene was walking slowly and was uneasy on his feet. He described him as being “noticeably awkward” and different than usual.



[23]      As Cst. Bryant stepped out of the police vehicle to talk to Daniel Greene, Daniel was lit up by the headlights. Cst. Bryant noted a cut or abrasion on his lip and redness around his eyes.



[24]      Cst. Bryant testified that at this point, 4:13 a.m., he believed Daniel Greene was the driver of the truck involved in the accident. He advised Daniel Greene he was under arrest for leaving the scene of an accident.



[25]      Daniel Greene let out an utterance and asked, “What’s going on?”  As he spoke Cst. Bryant noted the smell of alcohol on Daniel Greene’s breath.



[26]      At this point Cst. Bryant asked Austin Green to get out of the vehicle. He put Daniel Greene into the front seat of the police vehicle, as the car had not warmed up and Daniel Greene was dressed lightly.



[27]      Austin Green was on the phone with Daniel Greene’s mother and Austin was pressing Cst. Bryant to speak to her.  Cst. Bryant took the phone and spoke to Mrs. Greene. She was extremely worried about Daniel. She told him that she had talked to him and he was “freaking out” and she could not understand what had happened.



[28]      Between 4:16 a.m. and 4:26 a.m. Cst. Bryant read Daniel Greene the Motor Vehicle Act compulsory reporting caution and told him he had the right to counsel and cautioned him that anything he said could be used as evidence. Daniel Greene said he understood the cautions and he did not want to contact a lawyer.



[29]      At 4:26 a.m., after speaking with his acting Supervisor, Cst. Bryant cautioned Daniel Greene he was being investigated for impaired driving causing death and leaving the scene of an accident causing death.



[30]      At 4:27 a.m. Cst. Bryant read to Daniel Greene from his blue card the formal right to counsel advice and the formal caution against self-incrimination. Again, Daniel Greene said he understood.



[31]      At 4:29 a.m. Daniel Greene said to Cst. Bryant: “Just the way I feel is making me feel I’m the cause of this. If I did leave the house, I don’t remember leaving”. Cst. Bryant then said, “But you did leave the house.” and Daniel Greene said, “Yes I got picked up on the side of the road”.



[32]      Cst. Bryant then went to the door of the house and asked Austin Green how long ago he and Brandon had picked up Daniel.  Austin said it had been 45 minutes to an hour ago. Cst. Bryant also asked Austin Green if Daniel Greene had had any alcohol after he was brought back to the house. Austin Green said “No, no we tried to get him to drink water.”



[33]      At 4:40 a.m. Cst. Bryant asked Austin Green what time his girlfriend had called from the accident scene. Austin Green said it was at 3:14 a.m.



[34]      Cst. Bryant testified that at this point, he had formed the opinion that the accident had happened recently, and that Daniel Greene did not drink alcohol after he was picked up by Austin Green and Brandon.  He also believed Daniel Greene was impaired. Cst. Bryant had already formed the belief he was the driver of the truck.



[35]      At 4:45 am Cst. Bryant advised Daniel Greene he was under arrest for impaired driving causing death and asked if he understood.  Daniel Greene replied “Yes, I’m not saying I did or did not drive. I had a few people at the house. I can’t think of a reason to leave the house.  I can’t remember.” He then started crying.



[36]      Cst. Bryant then asked if he understood he had the right to a lawyer and Daniel Greene said he did.



[37]      Cst. Bryant again read Daniel Greene his right to counsel and caution against self-incrimination. Daniel Greene said he understood and that he did not want to contact a lawyer.



[38]      At this point a car had driven into the driveway and an individual named Cheryl Wilcox stepped out and said that Daniel Greene’s mother Heather Greene had asked her to pick up Daniel. Cst. Bryant backed the police vehicle out of the driveway and parked it facing northbound on Route 776, to separate Daniel Greene from Cheryl Wilcox.



[39]      At 4:50 a.m. Cst. Bryant read Daniel Greene the demand for breath test by an approved instrument.
