(a)   On September 14, 2018, Woodstock Police Force responded to Tim Hortons on Main Street in Woodstock regarding a male who had pepper sprayed staff and customers inside the store.

(b)   Upon arrival police noted several individuals outside the store, along with Tim Hortons employees.  Several individuals advised police that the male suspect was still inside the store and that he had pepper sprayed inside the establishment.  Police observed that some patrons’ eyes and faces were red and some were coughing.

(c)   Police entered the Tim Hortons and observed Kyle Kennedy standing inside.  Police also located a yellow-black canister of bear spray inside Tim Hortons.

(d)   On September 14, 2018, police obtained a statement from Rickey Reid.  Mr. Reid informed police that he went to Tim Hortons at approximately 3:00 p.m. that day.  He sat down by the front windows at the second table from the entrance.  Mr. Reid said that he saw a male two tables down from him, who was later identified as Mr. Kyle Kennedy.  The two men were unknown to each other.

(e)   Mr. Reid explained that he was at his table for approximately 20 minutes and that Mr. Kennedy was on his phone during this time.  Mr. Reid informed police that Mr. Kennedy stood up and mumbled something, but that he did not know what he said.  He then stated that Mr. Kennedy pointed something at him and sprayed.  Mr. Reid stated that the spray hit him in the face and neck area and began to burn right away, affecting his neck and arms.  According to Mr. Reid, Mr. Kennedy was approximately ten feet away when he sprayed him.

(f)   Kyle Kennedy provided a statement to police on September 15, 2018 where he admitted to spraying the bear spray but said that he only did it in self defence.  He explained that he was scared for his life.  He advised police that a man inside the restaurant put his hands near his pocket, so he started to unzip his bookbag and get out his bear mace.  Mr. Kennedy further advised police that he told the man to stop reaching for his pockets but he wouldn’t so he sprayed him with bear mace.  He went on to say that when the guy was reaching for his pocket he was looking at him strangely, but that he did not see any weapons.  Mr. Kennedy further advised police that the reason he sprayed the guy was because he thought he was going to shoot or stab him.

(g)   Mr. Kennedy also advised police that on the evening of September 13, 2018 he took enough stimulants to stay awake.  He further advised that the last time he had consumed drugs was approximately 12 hours before the Tim Hortons incident.

(h)   On September 14, 2018 Mr. Kennedy was subject to a judge’s undertaking containing the condition to keep the peace and be of good behaviour. 
