In February 2017, the RCMP J Division Federal and Serious Organized Crime (FSOC) began an investigation (Operation J-Triton) into the activities of a number of individuals including Robin MOULTON.  Police had been receiving confidential source information that Mr. MOULTON had recently moved to New Brunswick and was involved in criminal activity in the Maritime Provinces.



Robin MOULTON is a full patch member of the Hells Angels Motorcycle Club (HAMC) and has been for the last 12 years.  He had been a member of the Downtown Toronto chapter and came to New Brunswick in the fall of 2016.  Mr. MOULTON is the owner of an incorporated business which sells clothing and merchandise aimed at promoting the motorcycle lifestyle.  MOULTON outwardly supports the motorcycle community, attends biker events, and has an extensive presence on social media.



Marie-Antonette BUGAY was at one time the girlfriend of Mr. MOULTON.  Ms. BUGAY is associated to Mr. MOULTON’S incorporated company.



Over the course of several months in the spring and summer of 2017, Mr. MOULTON and Ms. BUGAY and other unidentified persons were observed by police surveillance teams accessing various storage lockers, three in Fredericton, NB and one in Woodstock, NB.  At times, Mr. MOULTON attended alone, other times, Ms. BUGAY attended alone, and occasionally they attended together.  During this same period of time police received confidential source information that Mr. MOULTON was trafficking in cocaine and being assisted by Ms. BUGAY.



On May 11, 2017, Mr. MOULTON and an unidentified person were observed transporting what the police surveillance team believed to be a large red hydraulic shop press from one of the storage lockers in Fredericton to the storage locker in Woodstock.  The investigative team believed this was significant as a hydraulic press of the type observed by the police can be used to press cocaine.



On May 30, 2017, the police obtained a General Warrant which granted covert access to the storage locker in Woodstock.



On June 8, 2017, the General Warrant was executed covertly at the storage locker in Woodstock.  The execution of the General Warrant revealed a red hydraulic shop press and metal blocks containing cocaine residue, and other items.



On August 19, 2017, a second General Warrant was granted for the Woodstock storage locker.  This General Warrant authorized the police to install a motion activated camera to take still photographs inside the storage locker.



On August 21, 2017, the second General Warrant was executed, and the police set up a motion activated still camera inside the storage locker.  During the execution of the second General Warrant police located the same red hydraulic press along with 2 additional hydraulic presses and a red duffle bag.  In the red duffle, police located several items, including a grey wool mitten containing a loaded 9mm Beretta handgun.  The firearm was rendered inoperable by the police and returned to its original position and the ammunition was seized.  Subsequent analysis of the handgun revealed Ms. BUGAY’S DNA on the trigger.



On August 22, 2017, police surveillance observed Mr. MOULTON attended the storage locker in Woodstock in a rental vehicle.  At 06h57, still photographs from the motion activated still camera showed Mr. MOULTON operating a hydraulic press to press a white substance into the form of a brick.  He then placed the white brick into a clear bag, and into a black duffle bag and exited the storage locker.  He re-entered his rental vehicle and drove towards Fredericton.  It was believed by the police that Mr. Moulton was pressing cocaine.



At 7h21, RCMP members stopped Mr. MOULTON’S rental and placed him under arrest.  The police search of the vehicle incident to Mr. MOULTON’S arrest turned up a black duffle bag containing a brick of compressed white powder which was determined to be 272.4 grams, or approximately 10 ounces, of cocaine at 35% purity.  As well, police seized cash, various drug paraphernalia, clothes, a Blackberry cell phone and a set of keys, later confirmed to be keys to the storage locker in Woodstock.  The cocaine in Mr. MOULTON’S possession has a value of between $12,000 and $24,000.



As a result of the events of August 22, 2017 resulting in Mr. MOULTON’S arrest the police sought search warrants for Mr. MOULTON’S residence, Ms. BUGAY’S residence and the storage lockers located in Fredericton and Woodstock.



On August 24, 2017, a search warrant was executed at the residence of Ms. BUGAY in Fredericton, NB.  Among her various personal items, police located 28.9 grams, or approximately one ounce, of powdered cocaine.  The cocaine in Ms. BUGAY’S possession has a value of between $1,400 and $4,000.



On August 29, 2017, Ms. BUGAY was arrested in her vehicle.  A search of her vehicle incidental to arrest revealed a black bag on the passenger side containing $77,010.00 cash, which is acknowledged to be the proceeds of crime.



Mr. MOULTON has been in custody since the date of his arrest on August 22, 2017.



Ms. BUGAY has been in custody since the date of her arrest on August 29, 2017.
