[3] The Crown’s case is that shortly after the defendant and Lorna Graham began living together, and they had a son, problems began. Mr. Forbes started to become abusive towards her. This involved the use of violence and threats to harm her. The first incident resulting in a Criminal Code charge involved the defendant forcing his way into her car while armed with a hammer in November, 1992; the last incident in February, 1993, saw the defendant attack Ms. Graham with a butcher’s knife, seriously wounding her. A warrant issued for his arrest for attempted murder. In September, 1994, he told her that he was walking around with a gun, and would kill her if she did not return home with their children. Ms. Graham was extremely frightened, and reported the threats to the police. However, they were unable to locate Mr. Forbes.

 

[4] On the evening of 16 September 1994, Ms. Graham and some friends went to the Whip Burger restaurant and club, located in an industrial complex in the Jane Street and Lawrence Avenue area of Toronto. At some time after midnight, she felt a hand grab on to her. It was the accused. He told her that he had come for her. Ms. Graham yelled out that it was Dudley and not to let him take her. Others came to her assistance and the defendant was taken out the front door; she hid in the DJ booth, cowering on the floor. Meanwhile, the accused retrieved a gun from his car, and began firing through the door when he was unable to gain entrance. Once inside, he proceeded to walk around, firing the gun some more in the area where he had previously confronted Lorna Graham. Several persons inside the Whip Burger were hit by bullets. Two people died and four others were injured; none of the victims was known to the accused. Ms. Graham, however, was not injured. Mr. Forbes then fled the scene in his car and was able to avoid detection until he was located in Jamaica in 2004. He was returned to Canada in September, 2004, and charged in relation to the shootings at the Whip Burger and the previous incidents involving Ms. Graham.

 

Lorna Graham
 

[5] Lorna Graham is now 37 years old. Her relationship with Dudley Forbes began after they met at a wedding in 1989. She was 21 years old at the time She is the mother of two children, the youngest of whom was born to her and Mr. Forbes in September, 1990. According to Ms. Graham, the accused was happy that they were going to have a child together, but he began to beat her when she was pregnant. Although he promised not to do this again, it seemed every time he would get angry he would hit her. He also choked her one time to the point of making her mouth foam. She began to think about leaving him but was afraid to tell him. The police were called once but just spoke to Mr. Forbes and did not lay charges. Finally, she decided to leave him, and took their children with her after he left for work or school that day. Their son was a little over one year old at the time. The accused was angry and wanted her to return back to him. She was scared to do so and refused.

 

Evidence as to Events Preceding the Shootings at the Whip Burger
 

Forcible Confinement; Assault with a Weapon (30 November 1992)

 

[6] Ms. Graham testified that the defendant would call her at her new place of residence, work, and her mother’s, telling her to return home with the children. She told him that she was not going to come back and to stop calling. He threatened to kill her if she did come back. She did not believe him at the time. However, in November, 1992, between 4:00-4:30pm, the accused ran in front of her car as she was leaving work at a daycare center, and forced his way inside the vehicle. He had a hammer in his jacket. It was the first time she had seen him since leaving him. He demanded that she take him to where she was living. Ms. Graham complied as she was afraid. He kept one hand on her shoulder as she tried to jump out of the car. They were arguing during the drive and then went upstairs to her apartment; he threatened to kill her if she did not return home. This time she believed he was capable of doing so.

 

[7] Upon entering her apartment, the defendant threw Ms. Graham down on the bed in the childrens’ room, and hit her on the forehead with the hammer. He told her to come back to live with him and the kids. Although she agreed to do so, he seemed angry and spilled out her purse, finding her birth control pills. The defendant then forced her to have sex. Afterward he told her to get dressed and drove her back to work, where she got their kids. The defendant spoke to them for a while and then left. Ms. Graham reported the matter to the police, although she was too embarrassed to tell them about being made to have sex.

 

Threatening Bodily Harm (4 December 1992)

 

[8] Ms. Graham returned to her apartment and had the superintendent put four extra locks on the door due to her fear of Mr. Forbes. However, she did not really feel better. He began calling her, saying that she was playing games with him, and that he would kill her and the kids. She took his threats seriously and reported them to the police. There were also telephone calls to her mother’s place where the defendant told her if she did not come back he would kill her.

 

Breach of Bail (4 February 1993)

 

[9] Ms. Graham related an incident to the court where although the defendant was bound by an order to stay away from her and the children, he surprised her as she was returning to her apartment with her sister and kids. She had a funny feeling that something was not right, as she was walking down the hall. As she approached the door, she saw Mr. Forbes run to her. She got inside her apartment and locked the door; her sister and children remained outside in the hallway. The defendant was yelling that he wanted the children, although they were there with him. She called the police right away to report the incident.

 

Attempted Murder (13 February 1993)

 

[10] The time that Ms. Graham was hospitalized occurred on her sister’s birthday, on 13 February 1993. She had returned to her apartment and was preparing to go out. However, there was a funny noise from the childrens’ bedroom, as if the window had been broken. Alarmed that Mr. Forbes was in the house, she grabbed the phone to dial 911 and called for help. As she was shoving the children outside the door, she noticed the defendant in the living room, with a butcher’s knife in his hand.

 

[11] Mr. Forbes ran after her and tackled her on the hallway floor. She was lying on her back. He began stabbing her in the face. She raised her hands to defend herself, and was stabbed in the arms as a result. The children were screaming at the defendant and tried to get him off; the superintendent was also in the area. Ms. Graham managed to kick him, which caused him to stumble and drop the knife. She threw it to the children. Mr. Forbes took off when he heard the sirens. As a result of this incident, she received 13 stab wounds. They were to her face, left arm, left breast, leg and belly. 198 stitches were required to close the wounds. She still has numbness in one arm. One of the wounds on the left side was very deep, and close to her heart.  

 

September, 1994 Phone Calls
 

[12] In the days and weeks following the stabbing, Ms. Graham did not recall if she heard from the accused. However, as their son’s birthday drew near in September, 1994, he began calling her. The first time he told her that he wanted to see his son. She froze on the phone and hung up, calling the police. The phone calls then started to become constant; she felt as if she was calling the police every other day. The accused would threaten her, saying if he could not see the kids, he would kill her and them. The last time he said that was walking with a gun for her. It made her feel scared. 

 

The Whip Burger Evening (16-17 September 1994)

 

[13] On Friday evening, 16 September 1994, Lorna Graham and some friends went to the Whip Burger restaurant and dance club, located at 2011 Lawrence Avenue West in Toronto. She was accompanied by Wendy Clarke, Joseph Walker and Dana (“Jan”) Cumberbatch. Ms. Graham had been there before, and the four drove in her car, a champagne coloured BMW, arriving after mid-night. She had never been there before with Mr. Forbes. After going through security, her group sat in a booth and she ordered a beer. Later, she decided to get something to eat and got up to order some food. Someone then grabbed her on the left shoulder and said in a Jamaican patois, “Lorna, I come for you.” She froze, dropping what was in her in hand, as she recognized the voice. It was Dudley Forbes. This was the first time she had seen him since being stabbed by him in February, 1993.

 

[14] The defendant tried to pull her out of the club. She resisted and screamed out for help, shouting that it was Dudley. A number of guys came to help her. When the defendant could not manage to “grab her out”, he swung and punched her in the side of the face with his right hand. Her face began to swell as he was wearing two gold rings. Ms. Graham fell to the ground and stayed low, making her way to the DJ booth where she locked the door. She could hear a lot of noise, as people were arguing with Mr. Forbes but she could not make out the words.

 

[15] Once inside the DJ booth, Lorna Graham heard a number of gun shots. It sounded like there were six or seven of them; they were coming from the front door area. Shells were dropping to the side of the door and sliding underneath the DJ booth door. She did not actually see anyone with a gun in hand. After about five or six minutes, the gunshots stopped and people started screaming. She opened the door and went out. There was a guy on the dance floor, bleeding; she did not know who he was. Another man had been shot and her friend Jan had been struck by a bullet in the face. Ms. Graham was taken outside and went to the hospital where she was given pain killers for the bruising on her face. She later gave a statement to the police. Subsequently, she moved away from Toronto and did not see Mr. Forbes again until testifying in court 11 years later.

 

Lorna Graham’s Friends at the Whip Burger
 

Wendy Clarke
 

[16] Wendy Clarke had been to the Whip Burger a few times before with Ms. Graham. She thought their group arrived at about 2:00a.m. on this occasion. After dancing for a while, they were hungry and she, Lorna and Jan went to get something to eat. Joseph Walker was not with them at the time. While they were at the food counter, she heard Lorna Graham say, “Oh my God, Dudley’s here”. She then told Jan, “Please don’t let him take me outside, he’ll kill me.” She was loud and scared. She grabbed on to Jan’s clothing while a man was pulling on Lorna, towards the entrance door. The witness and others tried to pull the man from the back, and eventually Lorna fell to the floor. She helped her hide in the DJ booth and pushed the door back behind her.

 

[17] As Ms. Clarke left the DJ booth, she noticed the same man coming back, towards the dance area. He was holding a gun straight in front of him; there was light coming from what was in his hand. He fired the gun a number of times. Before that, she heard gun shots coming from outside the door to the club. She ran past the man to get out of the Whip Burger. According to the witness, the man with the gun was walking to the dance area inside the club, but his hand did not seem to be pointed at anything. He just held the gun straight in front of him, firing it.  

 

Joseph Walker
 

[18] Joseph Walker was dating Wendy Clarke at the time in question. He went to the Whip Burger with her, along with Lorna Graham and Jan Cumberbatch. He thought they got there after 12:15am, and he gave them money to buy food and drinks. He then went on to the dance floor. While there, he noticed Lorna Graham come running back, stating “Dudley’s here”. She was frantic and nervous. He pulled her to the side and put her in to the DJ booth. He then looked for a place to hide as there was a “hail of gun fire” around him. He had no recollection of where he went to get out of the way.

 

[19] According to the witness, shots began being fired shortly after he put Ms. Graham inside the DJ booth. He did not see the shooter’s face. After refreshing his memory with his statement, he recalled the person with the gun moving it around in his arms, making a “sweeping motion” from left to right, and then back from right to left. There were flashes from the gun as it fired and “just a lot of movement”. It appeared that the person was shooting randomly. He did not hear him say anything. After Mr. Walker was able to leave the Whip Burger, he saw the person drive off in a green car. There were two more shots fired from the car as it sped off.

 

Dana (“Jan”) Cumberbatch
 

[20] Ms. Cumberbatch was raised with Wendy Clarke, and through her met Lorna Graham. Her friends knew her as “Jan” due to her birthday being in January. The witness recalled arriving at the Whip Burger towards midnight after being picked up by Ms. Graham. Once inside, Lorna and Wendy went to get some food while she stayed at their table. The next thing she knew, she felt Lorna grabbing on to her shirt, with both hands and very tightly. She said, “Jan, don’t let him take me.” A number of people rushed over, some of whom grabbed the guy who was grabbing on to Lorna. He was trying to pull her towards the front door. Eventually the man and Ms. Graham were separated but she did not know where they each went afterwards.

 

[21] The witness started to run to the back of the kitchen area, down the hallway, when she looked around to the front door and heard glass shatter. She looked around and then felt her lip go numb. She heard several gun shots; it sounded like they were coming from outside the Whip Burger. Ms. Cumberbatch realized she had been shot and went inside a storage room to hide. There were about five other people there. One was a man who had been shot in his toes, which were bleeding. They held the door shut as several more shots were fired. She never did see who was firing the gun. After a while, Wendy told her it was safe to come out of the room. She was taken to the hospital where she received stitches to the left side of her lip. 

 

Other Witnesses to the Shootings
 

Natasha Roberts                                                                                                           
 

[22] Natasha Roberts was also one of the shooting victims at the Whip Burger. She arrived at the club around 11:00pm. She stayed inside and then went back out throughout the evening. At one point she heard two men talking outside about the club getting “shot up” that night. However, she returned inside and sat down at a table with her friends. Subsequently, she heard gun shots and turned around. She saw someone coming in to the club with a gun in his hand. He walked inside with the gun and was shooting. The gun was pointed up and straight, parallel to the ground, and he was pulling the trigger back and shooting, in a slide action, while walking into the corner. There were about 50 people in the corner who were crying and screaming. She believed she heard three shots fired from the gun.

 

[23] One of the guys she was with told her to run outside, so she headed towards the front doors of the club after the man with the gun went by her. While she was exiting the club, she was grazed by a bullet on the left side of her upper thigh, right in the middle, between her knee and hip. She grabbed her leg and noticed the bullet. She also recalled seeing a man get shot right in front of her as she was exiting the club, at the entrance of the front door. While she was outside, a car drove slowly by and she heard a shot from the car; she was unable to see the driver. She could not recall how many shots were fired.

 

Shaun Morgan
 

[24] Another person wounded at the Whip Burger was Shaun Morgan. He was talking to a lady in the food section of the club when he noticed a man come inside and start “beating on his lady”. The woman cried out for help and fell to the ground. A couple of guys intervened and pulled her back inside to get her away from the man, and she went to the dance side of the restaurant. The man who struck her ran back outside. He then tried to return to the Whip Burger; however, a number of people were holding the door shut, preventing him from getting back inside.

 

[25] The witness then heard two or three gun shots. They were coming from outside the front door. The man then entered the Whip Burger. Mr. Morgan ran over to the bar area with a group of others and jumped over the counter; he laid down on the ground. He could hear at least four more shots being fired in the area of the dance floor, where the lady went after being beaten up earlier. Things became “very quiet” after that. Once the police arrived, everyone rushed outside. Mr. Morgan felt a pain on his left toe and realized he had been shot. He thought this happened when he was at the front of the club, facing the front door. There was also someone who had been shot lying down outside. The witness was taken to the hospital and had surgery on his foot.

 

Allan Brown
 

[26] Allan Brown had met Lorna Graham through a friend. He did not know she was going to be at the Whip Burger on the evening in question. He had seen her there several times before. Mr. Brown arrived between 11:00-11:30pm and went to play pool in the back. After that he had a beer and went to the dance side of the restaurant. He noticed that Lorna Graham was there later on, when she was getting food from the counter. She was with her friends, Wendy and Jan. Mr. Brown said hello to Lorna and went back to the dancing area. He then heard her start to scream, “Dudley, Dudley”. He turned around and saw Dudley “thumping” Lorna; he hit her in the face with his arm. He was trying to pull her outside. Ms. Graham was hanging on to Wendy.  Mr. Brown grabbed her to help her get away and also held on to Mr. Forbes. Dudley then went outside on his own and Ms. Graham ran to the music room.

 

[27] After the altercation, Mr. Brown went outside and stood at the door. He noticed that the man who had been trying to get Lorna out of the club ran to a car which was parked by the “Whip truck”, facing the Whip Burger. The man went to the passenger side and took out a gun. He then walked to the Whip Burger. Mr. Brown spoke to him, saying “Rude boy, cool it down”. He was close enough to touch him, although he did not recall if he did. There was no response. The man fired two shots inside the Whip Burger. He was holding the gun in his right hand, at waist level, pointing it at the ground while he was walking. Mr. Brown described the gun as being semi-automatic, and silver and gold. He was familiar with guns from his family in Jamaica who were police officers. He thought the caliber of the gun was 9 mm.

 

[28] According to the witness, it seemed as if someone was trying to hold the door closed. It was after this that the man fired the two shots inside the Whip Burger and opened the door, going inside. Mr. Brown heard screams as six more shots were fired. He moved behind a car for protection. A guy ran outside and dropped by his feet; he had been shot inside the Whip Burger. There was a hole inside his right hip, although he was not bleeding. Mr. Brown picked him up and laid him against Lorna Graham’s car. Dudley Forbes then came running out from the Whip Burger. The gun was still in his right hand. Mr. Brown held up his head; Mr. Forbes saw him and fired two shots in his direction by Lorna’s car. He could not say that he was trying to hit him. They were separated by about 20-25 feet. Mr. Forbes then rushed into his car on the passenger side, and drove off. Mr. Brown returned inside and found Lorna Graham hiding; she was lying on the floor in the music room. She came outside and sat on the curb with him. She was crying. The police and an ambulance arrived shortly afterwards.

 

Keith Sinclair
 

[29] Mr. Sinclair arrived at the Whip Burger at about 3:00am and parked his car, a Chevrolet Beretta, by the front entrance. He was with a number of friends, including Leroy Whittaker. He did not intend to stay but went inside to use the pay phone. When he realized that he did not have any money, he went inside the pool hall area in the back, looking for his friends. He then returned to the pay phone once he got a quarter. The phone was very close to the front door. While he was using the telephone, he heard some “scuffling” behind him, as if people were arguing. He noticed that there was a fight going on: a lady was sitting on the floor while a guy was beating her, striking her with closed fists. Some guys came over and held on to the man, and then put him outside the door. The witness remained on the phone.

 

[30] While Mr. Sinclair was talking on the phone, he heard someone say, “he’s coming back”. The witness peaked outside, and saw a man coming up the driveway. It was the same person who had been fighting with the girl. He had gone to a car across the street and opened the driver’s side door; he bent over as if he was getting inside. Three guys were holding the door closed while another was trying to open it from the outside. It looked like a “tug of war” on the door. Others ran over to help keep the door closed. Someone said to lock the door. When the person outside could not get the door to open, he fired three gun shots. Mr. Sinclair pulled back in to the corner and the guys moved away from the door. He did not actually see who it was that had the gun, nor did he see the gun being fired. A man came in and then turned to the left, in the direction of the party room. There were four more gun shots fired inside. It sounded like “wild shooting” without a “particular target”, but many people were getting hurt.

 

[31] At that point, the witness went outside and tried to get into his car to drive off. However, he could not get inside as he heard a few more shots outside, closer to him. He ran down the parking lot and hid behind a car. He noticed the gunman return to his car, which was parked on the opposite side, about 60 feet away from him. The man got inside and drove off. Once the car left the area, Mr. Sinclair left his place of cover and walked over to his car. He observed Leroy Whittaker coming out of the club, holding his stomach. He told him that he had been shot. He was holding on to his stomach; there was bleeding on the left side. Mr. Sinclair put him in his car and drove him to the hospital. [2]  He also noticed that there was a bullet hole in the trunk of his car

 

Alex Braid
 

[32] This witness was called by the defence at the preliminary inquiry. At the time of the shootings, he was living in a nearby apartment building on Weston Road, on the 24th floor. It was late at night on 17 September 1994 when he heard some gun shots. Mr. Braid went out to his balcony, which faces the Whip Burger, and looked down at the club. He saw a man running from it, towards a car, which was parked next to a large truck. The man opened the car door, put his hand in the window while holding the door open, and fired two shots towards the club. There were lots of people in the area although no one fell to the ground. The gunman then got in the car and drove away in a northwest direction. Mr. Braid called 911 to report the matter.

 

Police Evidence
 

Det. Wiszniowski  
 

[33] Det. Wiszniowski arrived on scene at the Whip Burger on 17 September 1994 at 6:45am. The restaurant is located at 2011 Lawrence Avenue West in Toronto. The nearest intersection to it is Lawrence Avenue and Jane Street. The Whip Burger is within an industrial complex, strip mall. A number of other businesses and offices are in the area. The Whip Burger itself takes up two units within the mall, although entrance is provided through one door only. There were two separate areas inside, one for the restaurant and the other for the dance floor.

 

[34] Over the course of the next few days the witness collected exhibits and took photographs. He was given a number of slugs and bullet fragments. There were five bullet holes in the front door leading inside the Whip Burger. The trajectory appeared from the exterior to the interior, given the damage to the glass inside but not outside the door. In the restaurant area, tables were turned over; in the dance area, there was damage to the mirror which looked like it had been caused by a bullet or sharp projectile. Blood appeared to be present on the floor.

 

[35] Det. Wiszniowski examined two motor vehicles which had been parked outside the Whip Burger before being moved to traffic services for analysis. One was a Chevrolet Beretta that had a bullet hole in the trunk, on the driver’s side (Keith Sinclair’s car) There were also bullet holes in the rear and side windows of a gold BMW vehicle. The trajectory of the bullets indicated that the shots were fired from the outside through the interior of the car. Two bullet fragments were recovered from the door post. The registered owner of this vehicle was Lorna Graham.

 

[36] The exterior search around the Whip Burger indicated that at least 10 shell casings were ejected or fired in the area. A bullet slug was also found on the ground by the front window. The shell casings were located within five to seven metres of each other; they were in the area of the parking lot and the front of the unit. Their markings were that of 9 mm ammunition. Inside the Whip Burger, on the restaurant side, there were 10 partial slugs that the witness examined, being located on the kitchen counter, table post and several places on the floor. In the dance area there were five shell cases and three bullets. These were located mostly on the floor, but also in a storage room and through the ceiling. In total, there were 13 bullets or fragments and 5 shell cases located within the restaurant and dance sides of the Whip Burger, and 10 shell cases and 1 bullet located outside the premises.

 

[37] Det. Wiszniowski testified that he could not say how many guns may have been used to fire the bullets on the evening in question. Neither was there any forensic evidence, such as blood or fingerprints, connecting Mr. Forbes to the crime scene.    

 

Staff Sgt. Prisor  
 

[38] The officer-in-charge of the case, Staff Sgt. Prisor, indicated, upon being called to testify by the defence, that none of the witnesses at the Whip Burger was shown a photographic line-up or array of pictures as part of the investigation. The reason for this, he explained, was that the investigators did not believe that any witnesses would be able to identify a suspect in a line-up, and that given Ms. Graham’s knowledge of Mr. Forbes, there was no reason to conduct one.

 

[39] According to the witness, the motor vehicle driver by the shooter was never recovered. A province-wide alert, as well as one at the Canadian-American border authority, did not produce any investigative leads. Neither were any finger prints belonging to Dudley Forbes located at the Whip Burger, including those taken from the exterior door handle.

 

Admissions  
 

[40] A number of admissions were placed on the record throughout the preliminary inquiry.  These included the identity of the two deceased parties, Donovan Samuda and Howard Deacon, as well as the time and date of their deaths. Continuity of the deceased and the exhibits was also admitted. The post mortem report for Howard Deacon indicates that he died of a gunshot wound to the abdomen; the post mortem report for Donovan Samuda indicates that he also died due to a gunshot wound to the abdomen. Mr. Deacon was shot and found inside the Whip Burger dance area whereas Mr. Samuda was shot and located outside the premises. The information alleges that the parties were shot with a semi-automatic handgun; the firearms report, admitted into evidence on consent, states that the weapon used in the incident could be a Ruger pistol.     

 

Test for Committal at Preliminary Inquiry