A.         THE EVIDENCE AT SALEH’S RE-TRIAL
[32]      At Saleh’s re-trial, the jury heard evidence from Yegin, Geagea, and Ebrekdjian. Esrabian did not testify. Saleh did not testify in his defence.

Yegin

[33]      In August 2015, prior to the trial, Yegin had been admitted into the witness protection program upon his agreement to testify at Saleh’s re-trial. In order to remain in the program, he was required to give evidence at the trial. Yegin was the only witness who gave direct evidence about the killing.

[34]      Yegin testified that he had no idea that Hassan was going to be killed on August 20, 2004. His understanding of the plan for that evening was that Hassan would meet with Porter to straighten out problems with rival drug dealers in Cornwall. The meeting was Saleh’s idea. Yegin spoke to Hassan to see if he was interested in the meeting. Hassan was.

[35]      According to Yegin, earlier on August 20 he was at Saleh’s residence in Gatineau hanging out with Esrabian and Saleh. Yegin then left and went back to his apartment, where Hassan joined him at around 8 p.m. Hassan and Yegin then left for Porter’s residence, which was located west of Ottawa, in a Jeep that Yegin had borrowed from Esrabian. Yegin was the driver.

[36]      Hassan and Yegin drove west on Highway 417. After passing the Bayshore area, they saw Saleh drive by using Yegin’s car. According to Yegin, Saleh made a hand motion directing Yegin to follow his car. Hassan expressed surprise at seeing Saleh. Yegin testified that he thought Hassan knew Saleh would be coming to the meeting with Porter.

[37]      The two cars exited the highway at Panmure Road and eventually drove to the end of a street. According to Yegin, when he arrived at the dead end, Saleh’s car was facing towards Yegin’s approaching Jeep, with its headlights on. Saleh was out of the car walking on the road. Yegin parked the Jeep about 30 feet from Saleh’s car. Saleh walked over to the Jeep. Yegin rolled down the window. Saleh came to the window and told Hassan that he wanted to talk to him.

[38]      Hassan got out of the Jeep. He and Saleh began to argue in Arabic. Yegin remained in the Jeep.

[39]      While still seated in the Jeep, Yegin looked to his left, turned around, and saw Esrabian. Yegin had not seen Esrabian leave the other car.

[40]      During his testimony, Yegin drew a sketch of his recollection of who stood where at the time of the shooting. It was marked as Exhibit 25 and is attached as Appendix A to these reasons. On his sketch, Yegin used an “O” to place Esrabian to the left of the Jeep, and an “X” to indicate where Saleh and Hassan were standing, having a heated discussion.

[41]      Yegin testified that Esrabian then shot Hassan. At that time, Esrabian was about 10 feet away from Yegin and a similar distance from Hassan: “Very close. Like 10 feet.”

[42]      Hassan did not go down on the first shot. According to Yegin, Hassan’s body jerked back, there was a second shot, and Hassan fell to the ground.

[43]      Yegin testified that there was then a third shot, with Saleh shooting Hassan at close range in the head. Yegin saw Saleh take out his gun and shoot Hassan in the head: “[Hassan] was on the ground and I remember a gun pointed right at his head. I remember the blast, I remember seein’ blood splattered on his head.”

[44]      During cross-examination, it was put to Yegin that at Saleh’s preliminary inquiry Yegin had agreed with the question that he witnessed the bullet go into Hassan’s head. The following exchange ensued at trial:

Q.  All right.  So you witnessed the bullet go into the head?

A.  Sir, it’s not like the movies where you see a-a-a....  When I saw – said that, I seen him shoot the gun.  I seen blood splatter over his head.  So my limited knowledge of that, he was shot in the head.  Did I actually see the bullet go right into his skull, like fragments and everything? No. But I say that, ’cause he got.... He was shot at his head, and I just seen blood splatter all over. Okay? So I understand your point. Did I see the bullet go in the head? I did not see it, but I-I knew that the bullet went to his head, because there’s blood splatter.

[45]      When confronted with the pathologist’s evidence that there was no wound to Hassan’s head, Yegin remained steadfast that he had seen a shot to Hassan’s head: “I can’t argue with the path-pathologist. I know what I saw. I know there was a shot to the head, and there was blood splatter. I remember it like yesterday.”

[46]      When asked how many shots he heard fired, Yegin stated: “I wanna say three, but it could be more”; “There coulda been another shot.”

[47]      Yegin testified that Esrabian had used a .45 Taurus handgun to shoot Hassan. Yegin did not see which gun Saleh used, but that he remembered seeing the Taurus and a black revolver at Saleh’s house after the killing.

[48]      Yegin stated that after the shooting, Saleh came toward him and said “it had to be done.” Saleh asked Yegin to help carry Hassan into the woods and dig a hole to bury the body. According to Yegin, by this time it was “kinda dark – like dusk”.

[49]      Yegin began to dig a grave with a shovel but testified that he “got too freaked out” and started to walk away. Saleh told him to meet up at his house. Yegin then left. At that point in time, Hassan had not been buried.

[50]      On his way back to Saleh’s house in Esrabian’s Jeep, Yegin stopped at a gas station, disabled Hassan’s cell phone and later disposed of it.

[51]      According to Yegin, by the time he arrived back at Saleh’s house, Saleh and Esrabian were already there. Another individual, Akram Sleiman, showed up with a knapsack filled with a large amount of money.

[52]      Yegin testified that Saleh told everyone to change their clothes, which eventually were discarded. They then drove to Yegin’s apartment, where Hassan had left his car. Yegin drove that car to another location in Ottawa. Yegin, Esrabian, and Saleh then went to the Gatineau casino to establish an alibi.

[53]      According to Yegin, Saleh later told him that the motive for the killing was that Hassan had tried to purchase drugs directly from Ebrekdjian.

Geagea

[54]      Geagea testified that as of the summer of 2004, he and Hassan were using Saleh for most of their drug purchases. Saleh, in turn, was sourcing his supply from Ebrekdjian.

[55]      Several months before Hassan’s disappearance, Geagea and Hassan went to Toronto to purchase drugs directly from Ebrekdjian. Geagea testified that Hassan later told him that Saleh found out they had gone directly to Ebrekdjian, prompting an argument.

[56]      Geagea and Hassan had breakfast together on the morning of August 20, 2004. Hassan told Geagea that he had gone to Toronto to give Ebrekdjian $170,000 for additional cocaine and expected to receive the drugs the next day. Geagea told Hassan that he had heard there was a hit out on him. Geagea was uncertain from whom the threat emanated and acknowledged that Hassan owed money to various individuals.

Ebrekdjian

[57]      Ebrekdjian testified[1] that he had been supplying cocaine to Saleh, who in turn was selling to Hassan. According to Ebrekdjian, the money Saleh supplied continually came up short. When Hassan approached Ebrekdjian to purchase cocaine directly from him, Ebrekdjian told Saleh about it as a courtesy. The news upset Saleh.

[58]      On August 19, 2004, Hassan dropped off $170,000 with Ebrekdjian in Toronto for the purchase of cocaine. When Ebrekdjian later counted the money, it was short. Ebrekdjian phoned Hassan, who said he would make up the shortfall later. Ebrekdjian then phoned Saleh and told him to take the money and return it to Hassan. Ebrekdjian testified that Saleh sent Sleiman to collect the money, which he did in the early morning of August 20. Ebrekdjian testified that he had no idea Hassan had been killed. Saleh had told him Hassan had gone to Lebanon.

The pathology evidence

[59]      An autopsy was performed on Hassan’s body on June 29, 2005. By the time of the trial the attending pathologist had retired, so Dr. Christopher Milroy, a forensic pathologist, provided evidence about the autopsy result based on his review of the file.

[60]      Dr. Milroy testified that the autopsy disclosed “an apparent close-range gunshot to the upper anterior left chest,” between the third and fourth ribs, which struck the pulmonary artery. He opined that he would expect a person suffering such a wound to collapse immediately. The bullet was still lodged in Hassan’s body; it was extracted and sent for ballistics analysis.

[61]      There was some blackening or soot staining in the chest wound. Soot staining is only observed when a bullet has been fired at close range. That led Dr. Milroy to conclude that it was a shot “from a close distance,” “within inches.”

[62]      The autopsy revealed a second bullet wound to the right-upper abdomen, with the bullet going into the proximal abdominal aorta and likely exiting the body at the left flank. Dr. Milroy was “a bit more cautious about saying – about whether this one was close. It could well have been.” In his view, the absence of blackening and soot staining for this wound indicated that the shot was not fired from within a few inches but was what pathologically is termed “distant or indeterminate.” In reality, however, it could be something like two feet away.

[63]      According to Dr. Milroy, both wounds were fatal; either would have caused death within minutes. Dr. Milroy could not tell which shot was fired first. They may have been fired in rapid succession.

[64]      Hassan’s skull was recovered intact. Fractures were observed, but Dr. Milroy opined that they were caused by significant blunt trauma applied after death. Dr. Milroy testified that there was no evidence of a bullet injury to Hassan’s head, in terms of penetrating the skull. Notwithstanding the significant skull fractures, Dr. Milroy opined: “we can exclude either of those scenarios of a bullet having entered or crossed the head.”

[65]      As revealed by the following exchange, Crown counsel asked Dr. Milroy whether it was possible that a shot had been aimed at Hassan’s head but failed to penetrate or perforate the skull, instead making contact with the side of the skin:

Q.   From the information you have available to you that you’ve reviewed, what if anything can you say about the possibility of a shot being aimed towards the head, not penetrating or perforating the skull, but making contact with the side of the skin as it were?

A.   Yes.  So obviously a shot at the head may miss closely and then it can do any degree of damage to the skin, from just grazing the surface to actually lacerating the skin to actually lacerating the skin and just grazing the skull itself.

If it had lacerated the skin and grazed the skull, or just lacerated the skin, we would have expected to have seen some evidence for that.  But a very superficial graze of the skin would be lost with the post-mortem changes. So what I would say is whilst it cannot be excluded, it also has to be fairly stated there is no evidence from the pathology point of view to support that.

[66]      On cross-examination, Dr. Milroy repeated that from a pathology point of view, there was no evidence of a grazing shot to Hassan’s head.

Ballistics evidence

[67]      Another expert, Grant Veitch, provided an opinion about the bullet recovered from Hassan’s body, three .45 calibre shell casings found at the crime scene, and a .45 calibre Heckler and Koch Model USP Tactical semi-automatic pistol found during a search of Ebrekdjian’s home. Veitch concluded that:

(i)         the bullet recovered from Hassan was a .45 calibre;

(ii)        all three expended shell casings found at the scene were fired from the same gun;

(iii)      the bullet recovered from Hassan could have come from the same or similar calibre and type of firearm as the shell casings; and

(iv)      the expended shell casings and the recovered bullet were probably fired from a .45 calibre handgun, such as an Eagle Gun Apache Mark 2 Carbine or a Taurus Millennium .45 calibre, or similar model.

Cell phone evidence

[68]      Finally, cell phone and tower records were adduced into evidence. They revealed that the cell phones of Hassan, Yegin, and Esrabian were all present near the scene of the crime on the evening of August 20. At the time, Saleh’s cell phone was either out of battery, turned off, or out of range. A fourth phone, registered in the name of “Frank Machevelli,” moved alongside the other phones throughout the evening of August 20 and may have belonged to Saleh. The Crown nevertheless argued that Yegin possessed this phone on the night of the killing. Yegin testified that it was “very common” for them to pass phones around.

B.           FIRST GROUND OF APPEAL: LEAVING WITH THE JURY THE THEORY THAT SALEH CAUSED ONE OF THE FATAL WOUNDS
(i)           HOW THE ISSUE AROSE AT THE RE-TRIAL

[69]      In his opening, Crown counsel anticipated that the jury would be left with three routes by which Saleh could be found guilty of first degree murder: (i) he was present at the scene of the shooting, but was not necessarily the shooter; (ii) he was not present at the scene of the killing but was part of a plan to kill Hassan; or (iii) while not part of a plan to kill Hassan, Saleh was part of a scheme to lure Hassan to a remote location – kidnapping by fraud – knowing that Hassan’s murder was a probable consequence of what would transpire.

[70]      During the pre-charge conference, the trial judge asked Crown counsel to describe their theory about the cause of Hassan’s death. The Crown identified a shot fired by Esrabian as the cause of Hassan’s death and described Saleh as part of the plan to murder Hassan. The Crown alternatively characterized Saleh’s conduct as giving rise to culpability for first degree murder either as an aider and abetter or a joint principal, even if Saleh was not the shooter or was not at the scene.

[71]      In the early stages of the pre-charge conference, Crown counsel stated that “there is no evidence upon which we would urge the jury to find that [Saleh] physically or factually caused the death of … Hassan.” Later in the conference, Crown counsel stated that Dr. Milroy’s evidence did not completely foreclose the possibility of a grazing shot to the head, although the shot would not cause anything more than the marring of a fatally injured man. Yet, later, the Crown submitted that a possible scenario on the evidence was that Esrabian came up, as Yegin described, shot once, then shot twice more but missed, Saleh stood over Hassan, pulled the trigger, and the bullet went through Hassan’s torso.

[72]      The trial judge regarded that as “a perfectly legitimate scenario based on Mr. Yegin’s evidence.” In response to defence counsel’s submission that there was no evidentiary anchor for the suggestion that Saleh shot Hassan in the chest, the trial judge stated:

[Y]ou keep coming back to that, and yet we have evidence from Dr. Milroy that the shot to the chest was a close-range shot. We have evidence from Yegin that the last shot was a close-range shot. The one and only shot fired by Mr. Saleh was a close-range shot. We only have one close-range shot. We have evidence from Yegin that the last shot, the shot that he says Mr. Saleh fired, was a close-range shot. He says it was to the head, but he could have been mistaken.

[73]      Defence counsel contended that there was no way the jury could find that Saleh fired any fatal shot. Although Yegin was unwavering in his testimony that Saleh shot Hassan in the head, the pathologist testified that there was no bullet wound to the head. Accordingly, there was no evidentiary foundation for the jury to conclude that Yegin was mistaken on the placement of Saleh’s shot. That would be “an unreasonable irrational position to take.”

[74]      In closing submissions to the jury, the Crown canvassed several modes of participation by Saleh. Crown counsel spent most of his closing advancing a theory of liability based on Saleh’s presence at the scene of the killing, not firing a fatal shot, but operating as “the hub of the wheel, … the main orchestrator of the whole thing,” the “boss,” with Yegin and Esrabian acting as his subordinates. According to the Crown, Saleh orchestrated the plan to lure Hassan to a remote location near Panmure Road where the murder could be carried out undetected. When Yegin brought Hassan to the remote site, Saleh was there. Esrabian shot Hassan, as did Saleh. Although Saleh’s shot to Hassan’s head as described by Yegin did not cause his death, it was open to the jury to find that Saleh was responsible for one of the shots to Hassan’s torso that did kill him. Saleh directed the cover-up of Hassan’s murder. All that demonstrated a planned and deliberate murder, which made Saleh guilty of first-degree murder.

[75]      The Crown also briefly canvassed with the jury a path to liability under which Saleh fired one of the fatal shots:

One path to Mr. Saleh being found guilty of first-degree murder is that he was a principal or party in the planned and deliberate murder of the victim. You’ll be asked to examine whether he caused the death, whether the death was caused unlawfully, whether it was intentional, and whether it was planned and deliberate. You may find that Mr. Yegin is mixed up about the sequence of the shots or who’s responsible for the particular shots, and in that regard, you may look at the evidence of Dr. Milroy who talks about distances between the – the – I guess the muzzle of the gun when it’s discharged and the injuries observed to the victim, and it may be that you will come to the conclusion that Mr. Saleh is responsible for one of the shots to the torso.

[76]      Finally, the Crown also offered the jury an alternative path to finding Saleh guilty of first-degree murder, submitting that the luring or tricking of Hassan under false pretences to go to the remote site constituted a kidnapping. Since Saleh knew “that the killing was a probable outcome of what happened that night, where it happens during the kidnapping, that too is a first-degree murder.”

[77]      In his closing, defence counsel took the position that Saleh did not plan or participate in the killing of Hassan: Saleh was not present when Hassan was killed; nor did he participate in any planning of Hassan’s death. The only witness whom the Crown called who could place Saleh at the scene of the killing was Yegin, an admitted liar for whom the truth was “not a travelling companion.” As the jury could not rely on Yegin, “so goes the Crown’s case.”

(ii)         THE CHARGE

[78]      In her charge, the trial judge instructed the jury that there was more than one way for the Crown to prove Saleh’s guilt of first degree murder. First, they could convict Saleh of first degree murder if they were satisfied that he had committed a planned and deliberate murder of Hassan either as (i) a principal who shot Hassan and caused one of the two fatal wounds or (ii) as a person who “was otherwise an active participant in [Hassan’s] killing” but “not a direct cause of his death”. Alternatively, if they were satisfied that Saleh kidnapped Hassan with the intent to confine him against his will, the kidnapping and murder were part of the same series of events, and Saleh was an active participant in the killing of Hassan, liability for first degree murder would also be established.

[79]      In the section of the charge dealing with whether Saleh caused Hassan’s death, the trial judge noted Dr. Milroy’s evidence that there was no shot into Hassan’s head and no evidence from a pathology point of view that there was a grazing shot to the head. She reviewed Yegin’s evidence about what he saw and heard, as well as the ballistics evidence. She concluded this section of her charge by stating;

If you are satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Fadi Saleh shot Hussein El-Hajj Hassan or was otherwise an active participant in his killing, you should find that the Crown has proven this element of the offence of murder. You would go to the next question.

[80]      In a subsequent section dealing with whether Saleh had the state of mind required for murder, the trial judge again reviewed the evidence of Dr. Milroy and Yegin, reminding the jury that “the pathology evidence indicated there was no shot to Mr. Hassan’s head.” She continued: “If you have concluded that Mr. Saleh shot Hussein El-Hajj Hassan and thereby caused one of the two fatal wounds, you should have no difficulty finding beyond a reasonable doubt that he had the state of mind for murder.”

(iii)      THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS ON APPEAL

[81]      The crux of Saleh’s submission on this ground of appeal is that the evidence could not support the conclusion that Saleh fired one of the fatal shots. First, the evidence of Yegin and the pathologist was “diametrically opposed” or “mutually exclusive.” Even if the jury rejected Yegin’s evidence that Saleh had shot Hassan in the head, there still needed to be some affirmative evidence that Saleh fired one of the shots to the body in order to leave this scenario with the jury.

[82]      Saleh contends that where two versions of a particular event are diametrically opposed, usually there is no “air of reality” to a halfway scenario that arises on neither version. Therefore, the trial judge erred in providing an in-between scenario whereby both the pathologist and Yegin could be believed at the same time, when their evidence was mutually exclusive. Doing so called for the jury to speculate. While it is for the jury to choose among reasonable inferences available from the evidence, the jury cannot be invited to draw speculative inferences that do not flow from the presence or absence of evidence: R. v. Figueroa, 2008 ONCA 106, 232 C.C.C. (3d) 51, at para. 35; R. v. Pomeroy, 2008 ONCA 521, 91 O.R. (3d) 261, at para. 95. As well, the halfway scenario improperly allowed the Crown to call its own witness a liar and invite the jury to believe the very opposite of what the witness had said: R. v. Walker (1994), 1994 CanLII 8725 (ON CA), 18 O.R. (3d) 184 (C.A.), at pp. 197, 198-99.

[83]      Finally, Saleh contends that the trial judge misapprehended the evidence, failing to appreciate that the pathologist and Yegin did not use the term “close range” in the same manner.

[84]      The Crown disagrees, submitting that there was an evidentiary basis to support a reasonable inference that one of Hassan’s fatal gunshot wounds was caused by a bullet fired by Saleh. The jury was not required to accept all of Yegin’s evidence in determining whether there was an evidentiary basis supporting an inference that the appellant shot Hassan. Nor was the evidence of Dr. Milroy and Yegin “mutually exclusive.” The trial judge did not invite the jury to speculate, as there was evidence to support a reasonable inference that one of Hassan’s fatal gunshot wounds was inflicted by the appellant. The evidence showed that there was only one close range shot, which Esrabian could not have fired if the jury accepted Yegin’s evidence that Esrabian fired when he was 10 feet away from Hassan.