Evidence -- Statements -- Previous inconsistent statement -- Witness unable to recall all details of statement made to police -- Whether prior statement contradictory in any sense -- Right to call police officer to prove statement denied -- Whether substantial wrong or miscarriage of justice occasioned.

The accused D. and a companion, Mrs. N., were driving in a stolen vehicle. Between the two front seats was a sawed-off shotgun. They were stopped by an O.P.P. constable who noticed a headlight was not operating and had ascertained the vehicle was stolen. D. was asked by the constable to leave the car. D. opened the car door and discharged the shotgun at the constable, seriously wounding him. D. and Mrs. N. fled. Realizing that D. would need a new motor vehicle, D. and Mrs. N. drove to the K. residence where a truck was in the yard. Mrs. N. went to the door and asked to use the phone. D., carrying the shotgun, walked past Mrs. N., into the K. house. Mrs. K. was told by D. to lie down, or she would be shot. Mrs. K., instead, ran to the bedroom where Mr. K. was, and locked the door. D. Fired shots through the closed door wounding both Mr. and Mrs. K., Mr. K. fatally.

Mrs. K. was ordered out of the bedroom by D. upon threats of killing her grandchildren. Upon D.'s instructions, Mrs. N. tied up Mrs. K. and the children. D. took a rifle belonging to Mr. K. and the keys to the truck D. left the house and parked the car at the rear. He returned and D. and Mrs. N. turned off the lights and left.

A child freed herself and turned on a light. D. and Mrs. N. re-entered and D. threatened to kill them all. Mrs. K. and the children were tied up a second time. D. and Mrs. N. left in the truck. D. and Mrs. N. were apprehended at a road block. Found in the truck were the shotgun, the rifle taken from the K. residence, ammunition from both weapons, and twine similar to that used to tie Mrs. K. and the children. Mrs. N.'s purse contained shotgun shells. Both were charged with first degree murder. D. was convicted of first degree murder and Mrs. N. was convicted of second degree murder and sentenced to life imprisonment without eligibility for parole for 10 years. Both appealed their convictions.

Held: the appeals should be dismissed.

The court rejected the contention of the appellant that the unlawful confinement must be separate and independent from the commission of the robbery. As long as the offence of unlawful confinement had been committed contrary to s. 247 of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1970, c. C-34, the offence of first degree murder had been committed notwithstanding that the unlawful confinement may also have been incidental to the commission of some other crime.

Although the Court stated that since Mrs. K. did not remember some of the details of her statement to the police, and that this may have made her statement contradictory in a limited sense, thereby entitling counsel for Mrs. N. to call the police officer to prove the statement, it held the denial of the right to call the officer and the subsequent failure to formally prove the statement resulted in no substantial wrong or miscarriage of justice. The jury were aware of the existence of the statement and of the fact that the statement was used by defence counsel to cross-examine Mrs. K., and accordingly, the formal proof of it would have added nothing.

The learned trial judge had instructed the jury as to the possible responsibility of Mrs. N. for second degree murder on both s. 21(1)(b), (c) and s. 21(2). Only those instructions pertaining to s. 21(1)(b), (c) were appealed. D.'s responsibility for murder was based on s. 213(d) (am. 1974-75-76, c. 93, s. 13; c. 105, s. 29) since he caused the death of K. while committing or attempting to commit robbery or unlawful confinement or both. In order for one to be liable as a party to constructive murder, one must aid or abet the commission of the murder. It is not sufficient that one aid or abet the underlying offence only, for then s. 2(1)(c) would become a far broader base of criminal liability than s. 21(2), which at least requires that murder be a foreseeable, probable consequence of a first offence. The trial judge's instructions to the jury could only be interpreted as meaning that Mrs. N. must aid or abet the murder as defined in s. 213.

Appeals by the accused against convictions for first and second degree murder (see 1980 CanLII 2847 (ON SC), 53 C.C.C. (2d) 146).

[R. v. Gourgon (1979), 1981 CanLII 328 (BC CA), 19 C.R. (3d) 272, 58 C.C.C. (2d) 193; Cathro v. The Queen, 1955 CanLII 46 (SCC), [1956] S.C.R. 101, 2 D.L.R. (2d) 270, 113 C.C.C. 225, 22 C.R. 231 apld; R. v. Woods and Gruener (1980), 1980 CanLII 2928 (ON CA), 57 C.C.C. (2d) 220, 19 C.R. (3d) 136; R. v. Riezebos (1975), 1975 CanLII 1482 (ON CA), 26 C.C.C. (2d) 1]

Brian H. Greenspan, and C.J. Arnup, for appellant, Newstead.

Clayton C. Ruby, for appellant, Dollan.

David Watt, for the Crown, respondent.

The judgment of the Court was delivered by

Zuber J.A.: Darryl Dollan and Daryle Newstead were tried at Sault Ste. Marie before Mr. Justice DuPont [1980 CanLII 2847 (ON SC), 53 C.C.C. (2d) 146] and a jury on an indictment charging that they "on or about the 18th day of November 1978, at the Township of Day in the District of Algoma, unlawfully did commit first degree murder on the person of ROBERT KEHOE, contrary to the Criminal Code of Canada".

Dollan was convicted of first degree murder and sentenced to life imprisonment without eligibility for parole for 25 years. Newstead was convicted of second degree murder and sentenced to life imprisonment without eligibility for parole for a period of 10 years. They both now appeal against their convictions.

An understanding of the appellants' submissions requires an outline of the facts. During the fall of 1978, Dollan, who had been involved in a number of offences in the Toronto district, decided to leave the area and travel northward with Mrs. Newstead. The early morning hours of November 17, 1978, found Dollan driving a stolen car on a highway north of Sudbury. The appellant Newstead was his passenger. Between the two front seats of the vehicle Dollan had placed a loaded sawed-off shotgun and covered it with a coat. One of the headlights of the vehicle Dollan was driving was not operating and this attracted the attention of O.P.P. Constable Duffield who was patrolling the highway. Constable Duffield followed the vehicle and while so doing ascertained by radio that it was stolen. He elected not to stop the vehicle immediately but did so at a well-lighted truck stop further down the road. When the vehicles came to a stop, Constable Duffield approached the stolen vehicle carrying a flashlight and his revolver. After a brief discussion he asked Dollan to leave the car. Dollan opened the door and as he did so discharged the shotgun at Constable Duffield seriously wounding him. Duffield ran back toward the police cruiser and fired a shot at Dollan. Dollan fired again in the direction of Constable Duffield; this shot caused no injuries. Dollan then drove off in flight.

It was then apparent to Dollan that he would need a different vehicle with which to continue his travels. Towards this end he drove into the laneway of the Wolgemuth farm. However, upon encountering Mr. Wolgemuth and seeing there were others about, he abandoned the plan to steal a vehicle there. To explain his presence he asked directions and then drove off.

The appellants next drove to the Kehoe residence where a truck was parked in the yard. Dollan examined the truck seeking first the key and failing to find any then sought tools with which to hot wire the ignition system of the truck but without success. The keys would have to be obtained from inside the house. Newstead then went to the door of the Kehoe residence while Dollan remained beside the vehicle in possession of the shotgun which he had reloaded. Phyllis Kehoe answered the door in response to the knocking by Mrs. Newstead who told her that there had een an accident down the road in which a police officer had been shot and asked to use the phone. As Mrs. Kehoe was about to admit Mrs. Newstead, Dollan, carrying the shotgun walked past Mrs. Newstead and into the house. Mrs. Kehoe who understandably had difficulty in recalling the exact sequence of events believed that at this point Dollan pointed the gun at her and told her to lie down or he would shoot her. Mrs. Kehoe, however, ran to the bedroom for her husband was just getting out of bed and locked the door. Dollan, shouting obscenities, demanded that Mrs. Kehoe come out of the bedroom. He could hear the Kehoes speaking to each other and attempted to kick the door down but failed. Dollan then fired the shotgun through the closed door wounding both Mr. and Mrs. Kehoe.

The noise awakened a grandson and granddaughter of the Kehoes who were staying with them. Having become aware of the grandchildren Dollan yelled "that he had her kids and she had better come out or he would shoot them". Mrs. Kehoe then came out of the bedroom and Dollan ordered her and the two grandchildren to lie on the floor. Dollan then asked Mrs. Kehoe for the keys for the truck but she was unable to find them in her purse. Dollan then entered the bedroom and searched the dying Mr. Kehoe for the keys. He did not locate them but stole Mr. Kehoe's wallet and loose change. Dollan then instructed Newstead to tie up the Kehoes and their grandchildren. Newstead then tied up Mrs. Kehoe and the children with twine. Mr. Kehoe, who was unconscious, had his hands tied with his suspenders. Dollan then re-entered the bedroom and took a rifle belonging to Mr. Kehoe and some shells. At about this time he located the keys to the truck. He left the house to move the car in which they had arrived to the rear of the house. He then returned to the house where he and Newstead turned off the lights and left the house.

The granddaughter was able to free her hands almost immediately and turned on the light and then cut her grandmother free. Attracted by the lights in the house, Dollan and Newstead reentered and Dollan threatened to kill them all. Mrs. Kehoe and her grandchildren were then tied a second time with torn bedsheets. The appellants then left and drove off in the truck. Mrs. Kehoe was able to free herself and then the grandchildren. The telephone line had been cut by Newstead prior to the shooting so the grandson ran to the nearest neighbours who lived a mile away to summon help. The police arrived shortly thereafter to find that Mr. Kehoe was dead. Mrs. Kehoe was taken to the hospital. A short time later, the appellants in the Kehoe truck were stopped and arrested at a road block. Among the items found in the truck were the shotgun, the 303 rifle taken from the Kehoe residence, ammunition from both the weapons and a plastic Loblaws bag. The bag contained a pair of shoes, a box of sanitary napkins, a pair of corduroy pants and a roll of brown twine. The twine was similar to that used to tie Mrs. Kehoe and the grandchildren. Mrs. Newstead's purse was taken from her. It contained a number of shotgun shells.

While the appellants raised a number of issues on this appeal the Crown was called upon to respond to only three and it is with these grounds that I shall deal.